[{"link": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Basketball", "content": "Team sportThis article is about the sport. For the ball used in the sport, see Basketball (ball). For other uses, see Basketball (disambiguation).BasketballChris Dudley (#22), playing for the New Jersey Nets, squares off with Michael Jordan (#23), of the Chicago Bulls on March 28, 1991. Other players including Chicago's Bill Cartwright (#24) are present on the court.Highest governing\u00a0bodyFIBAFirst playedDecember\u00a021, 1891; 132 years ago\u00a0(1891-12-21). Springfield, Massachusetts, U.S.CharacteristicsContactLimitedTeam members5 per sideMixed-sexYes, separate competitionsTypeIndoor/OutdoorEquipmentBasketballVenueIndoor court (mainly) or outdoor court (Streetball)GlossaryGlossary of basketballPresenceCountry or\u00a0regionWorldwideOlympicYes, demonstrated in the 1904 and 1924 Summer OlympicsPart of the Summer Olympic program since 1936ParalympicYesOlympic pictogram for basketballBasketball is a team sport in which two teams, most commonly of five players each, opposing one another on a rectangular court, compete with the primary objective of shooting a basketball (approximately 9.4 inches (24\u00a0cm) in diameter) through the defender's hoop (a basket 18 inches (46\u00a0cm) in diameter mounted 10 feet (3.048\u00a0m) high to a backboard at each end of the court), while preventing the opposing team from shooting through their own hoop. A field goal is worth two points, unless made from behind the three-point line, when it is worth three. After a foul, timed play stops and the player fouled or designated to shoot a technical foul is given one, two or three one-point free throws. The team with the most points at the end of the game wins, but if regulation play expires with the score tied, an additional period of play (overtime) is mandated.Players advance the ball by bouncing it while walking or running (dribbling) or by passing it to a teammate, both of which require considerable skill. On offense, players may use a variety of shots\u00a0\u2013 the layup, the jump shot, or a dunk; on defense, they may steal the ball from a dribbler, intercept passes, or block shots; either offense or defense may collect a rebound, that is, a missed shot that bounces from rim or backboard. It is a violation to lift or drag one's pivot foot without dribbling the ball, to carry it, or to hold the ball with both hands then resume dribbling.The five players on each side fall into five playing positions. The tallest player is usually the center, the second-tallest and strongest is the power forward, a slightly shorter but more agile player is the small forward, and the shortest players or the best ball handlers are the shooting guard and the point guard, who implement the coach's game plan by managing the execution of offensive and defensive plays (player positioning). Informally, players may play three-on-three, two-on-two, and one-on-one.Invented in 1891 by Canadian-American gym teacher James Naismith in Springfield, Massachusetts, in the United States, basketball has evolved to become one of the world's most popular and widely viewed sports.[1][2] The National Basketball Association (NBA) is the most significant professional basketball league in the world in terms of popularity, salaries, talent, and level of competition[3][4] (drawing most of its talent from U.S. college basketball). Outside North America, the top clubs from national leagues qualify to continental championships such as the EuroLeague and the Basketball Champions League Americas. The FIBA Basketball World Cup and Men's Olympic Basketball Tournament are the major international events of the sport and attract top national teams from around the world. Each continent hosts regional competitions for national teams, like EuroBasket and FIBA AmeriCup.The FIBA Women's Basketball World Cup and Women's Olympic Basketball Tournament feature top national teams from continental championships. The main North American league is the WNBA (NCAA Women's Division I Basketball Championship is also popular), whereas the strongest European clubs participate in the EuroLeague Women.HistoryMain article: History of basketballEarly historyA game similar to basketball is mentioned in a 1591 book published in Frankfurt am Main that reports on the lifestyles and customs of coastal North American residents, Wahrhafftige Abconterfaytung der Wilden.[5] Among other things, a game of skill is described in which balls must be thrown against a target woven from twigs, mounted high on a pole. There's a small reward for the player if the target is being hit.[6]CreationJames Naismith c.\u20091920In December 1891, James Naismith, a Canadian-American professor of physical education and instructor at the International Young Men's Christian Association Training School (now Springfield College) in Springfield, Massachusetts,[7] was trying to keep his gym class active on a rainy day.[8] He sought a vigorous indoor game to keep his students occupied and at proper levels of fitness during the long New England winters. After rejecting other ideas as either too rough or poorly suited to walled-in gymnasiums, he invented a new game in which players would pass a ball to teammates and try to score points by tossing the ball into a basket mounted on a wall. Naismith wrote the basic rules and nailed a peach basket onto an elevated track. Naismith initially set up the peach basket with its bottom intact, which meant that the ball had to be retrieved manually after each \"basket\" or point scored. This quickly proved tedious, so Naismith removed the bottom of the basket to allow the balls to be poked out with a long dowel after each scored basket.The first basketball court: Springfield CollegeOld-style basketball with lacesShortly after, Senda Berenson, instructor of physical culture at the nearby Smith College, went to Naismith to learn more about the game.[9] Fascinated by the new sport and the values it could teach, she started to organize games with her pupils, following adjusted rules.[10] The first official women's interinstitutional game was played barely 11 months later, between the University of California and the Miss Head's School.[11] In 1899, a committee was established at the Conference of Physical Training in Springfield to draw up general rules for women's basketball. Thus, the sport quickly spread throughout America's schools, colleges and universities with uniform rules for both sexes.[12]Basketball was originally played with a soccer ball. These round balls from \"association football\" were made, at the time, with a set of laces to close off the hole needed for inserting the inflatable bladder after the other sewn-together segments of the ball's cover had been flipped outside-in.[13][14] These laces could cause bounce passes and dribbling to be unpredictable.[15] Eventually a lace-free ball construction method was invented, and this change to the game was endorsed by Naismith (whereas in American football, the lace construction proved to be advantageous for gripping and remains to this day). The first balls made specifically for basketball were brown, and it was only in the late 1950s that Tony Hinkle, searching for a ball that would be more visible to players and spectators alike, introduced the orange ball that is now in common use. Dribbling was not part of the original game except for the \"bounce pass\" to teammates. Passing the ball was the primary means of ball movement. Dribbling was eventually introduced but limited by the asymmetric shape of early balls.[dubious  \u2013 discuss] Dribbling was common by 1896, with a rule against the double dribble by 1898.[16]The peach baskets were used until 1906 when they were finally replaced by metal hoops with backboards. A further change was soon made, so the ball merely passed through. Whenever a person got the ball in the basket, his team would gain a point. Whichever team got the most points won the game.[17] The baskets were originally nailed to the mezzanine balcony of the playing court, but this proved impractical when spectators in the balcony began to interfere with shots. The backboard was introduced to prevent this interference; it had the additional effect of allowing rebound shots.[18] Naismith's handwritten diaries, discovered by his granddaughter in early 2006, indicate that he was nervous about the new game he had invented, which incorporated rules from a children's game called duck on a rock, as many had failed before it.[19]Frank Mahan, one of the players from the original first game, approached Naismith after the Christmas break, in early 1892, asking him what he intended to call his new game. Naismith replied that he had not thought of it because he had been focused on just getting the game started. Mahan suggested that it be called \"Naismith ball\", at which he laughed, saying that a name like that would kill any game. Mahan then said, \"Why not call it basketball?\" Naismith replied, \"We have a basket and a ball, and it seems to me that would be a good name for it.\"[20][21] The first official game was played in the YMCA gymnasium in Albany, New York, on January 20, 1892, with nine players. The game ended at 1\u20130; the shot was made from 25 feet (7.6\u00a0m), on a court just half the size of a present-day Streetball or National Basketball Association (NBA) court.At the time, soccer was being played with 10 to a team (which was increased to 11). When winter weather got too icy to play soccer, teams were taken indoors, and it was convenient to have them split in half and play basketball with five on each side. By 1897\u201398, teams of five became standard.College basketballMain article: College basketballThe 1899 University of Kansas basketball team, with James Naismith at the back, rightBasketball's early adherents were dispatched to YMCAs throughout the United States, and it quickly spread through the United States and Canada. By 1895, it was well established at several women's high schools. While YMCA was responsible for initially developing and spreading the game, within a decade it discouraged the new sport, as rough play and rowdy crowds began to detract from YMCA's primary mission. However, other amateur sports clubs, colleges, and professional clubs quickly filled the void. In the years before World War I, the Amateur Athletic Union and the Intercollegiate Athletic Association of the United States (forerunner of the NCAA) vied for control over the rules for the game. The first pro league, the National Basketball League, was formed in 1898 to protect players from exploitation and to promote a less rough game. This league only lasted five years.James Naismith was instrumental in establishing college basketball. His colleague C. O. Beamis fielded the first college basketball team just a year after the Springfield YMCA game at the suburban Pittsburgh Geneva College.[22] Naismith himself later coached at the University of Kansas for six years, before handing the reins to renowned coach Forrest \"Phog\" Allen. Naismith's disciple Amos Alonzo Stagg brought basketball to the University of Chicago, while Adolph Rupp, a student of Naismith's at Kansas, enjoyed great success as coach at the University of Kentucky. On February 9, 1895, the first intercollegiate 5-on-5 game was played at Hamline University between Hamline and the School of Agriculture, which was affiliated with the University of Minnesota.[23][24][25] The School of Agriculture won in a 9\u20133 game.In 1901, colleges, including the University of Chicago, Columbia University, Cornell University, Dartmouth College, the University of Minnesota, the U.S. Naval Academy, the University of Colorado and Yale University began sponsoring men's games. In 1905, frequent injuries on the football field prompted President Theodore Roosevelt to suggest that colleges form a governing body, resulting in the creation of the Intercollegiate Athletic Association of the United States (IAAUS). In 1910, that body changed its name to the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA). The first Canadian interuniversity basketball game was played at YMCA in Kingston, Ontario on February 6, 1904, when McGill University\u00a0\u2013 Naismith's alma mater\u00a0\u2013 visited Queen's University. McGill won 9\u20137 in overtime; the score was 7\u20137 at the end of regulation play, and a ten-minute overtime period settled the outcome. A good turnout of spectators watched the game.[26]The first men's national championship tournament, the National Association of Intercollegiate Basketball tournament, which still exists as the National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics (NAIA) tournament, was organized in 1937. The first national championship for NCAA teams, the National Invitation Tournament (NIT) in New York, was organized in 1938; the NCAA national tournament began one year later. College basketball was rocked by gambling scandals from 1948 to 1951, when dozens of players from top teams were implicated in match fixing and point shaving. Partially spurred by an association with cheating, the NIT lost support to the NCAA tournament.High school basketballA basketball game between the Heart Mountain and Powell High School girls teams, Wyoming, March 1944Before widespread school district consolidation, most American high schools were far smaller than their present-day counterparts. During the first decades of the 20th century, basketball quickly became the ideal interscholastic sport due to its modest equipment and personnel requirements. In the days before widespread television coverage of professional and college sports, the popularity of high school basketball was unrivaled in many parts of America. Perhaps the most legendary of high school teams was Indiana's Franklin Wonder Five, which took the nation by storm during the 1920s, dominating Indiana basketball and earning national recognition.Today virtually every high school in the United States fields a basketball team in varsity competition.[27] Basketball's popularity remains high, both in rural areas where they carry the identification of the entire community, as well as at some larger schools known for their basketball teams where many players go on to participate at higher levels of competition after graduation. In the 2016\u201317 season, 980,673 boys and girls represented their schools in interscholastic basketball competition, according to the National Federation of State High School Associations.[28] The states of Illinois, Indiana and Kentucky are particularly well known for their residents' devotion to high school basketball, commonly called Hoosier Hysteria in Indiana; the critically acclaimed film Hoosiers shows high school basketball's depth of meaning to these communities.High School of Montreal Girls Junior Basketball team, 1915\u20131916\u2063There is currently no tournament to determine a national high school champion. The most serious effort was the National Interscholastic Basketball Tournament at the University of Chicago from 1917 to 1930. The event was organized by Amos Alonzo Stagg and sent invitations to state champion teams. The tournament started out as a mostly Midwest affair but grew. In 1929 it had 29 state champions. Faced with opposition from the National Federation of State High School Associations and North Central Association of Colleges and Schools that bore a threat of the schools losing their accreditation the last tournament was in 1930. The organizations said they were concerned that the tournament was being used to recruit professional players from the prep ranks.[29] The tournament did not invite minority schools or private/parochial schools.The National Catholic Interscholastic Basketball Tournament ran from 1924 to 1941 at Loyola University.[30] The National Catholic Invitational Basketball Tournament from 1954 to 1978 played at a series of venues, including Catholic University, Georgetown and George Mason.[31] The National Interscholastic Basketball Tournament for Black High Schools was held from 1929 to 1942 at Hampton Institute.[32] The National Invitational Interscholastic Basketball Tournament was held from 1941 to 1967 starting out at Tuskegee Institute. Following a pause during World War II it resumed at Tennessee State College in Nashville. The basis for the champion dwindled after 1954 when Brown v. Board of Education began an integration of schools. The last tournaments were held at Alabama State College from 1964 to 1967.[33]Professional basketballAd from The Liberator magazine promoting an exhibition in Harlem, March 1922. Drawing by Hugo GellertTeams abounded throughout the 1920s. There were hundreds of men's professional basketball teams in towns and cities all over the United States, and little organization of the professional game. Players jumped from team to team and teams played in armories and smoky dance halls. Leagues came and went. Barnstorming squads such as the Original Celtics and two all-African American teams, the New York Renaissance Five (\"Rens\") and the (still existing) Harlem Globetrotters played up to two hundred games a year on their national tours.In 1946, the Basketball Association of America (BAA) was formed. The first game was played in Toronto, Ontario, Canada between the Toronto Huskies and New York Knickerbockers on November 1, 1946. Three seasons later, in 1949, the BAA merged with the National Basketball League (NBL) to form the National Basketball Association (NBA). By the 1950s, basketball had become a major college sport, thus paving the way for a growth of interest in professional basketball. In 1959, a basketball hall of fame was founded in Springfield, Massachusetts, site of the first game. Its rosters include the names of great players, coaches, referees and people who have contributed significantly to the development of the game. The hall of fame has people who have accomplished many goals in their career in basketball. An upstart organization, the American Basketball Association, emerged in 1967 and briefly threatened the NBA's dominance until the ABA-NBA merger in 1976. Today the NBA is the top professional basketball league in the world in terms of popularity, salaries, talent, and level of competition.Diamond DeShields (#1) drives to the basket around Maya Moore (#23) in the Minnesota Lynx vs Chicago Sky gameThe NBA has featured many famous players, including George Mikan, the first dominating \"big man\"; ball-handling wizard Bob Cousy and defensive genius Bill Russell of the Boston Celtics; charismatic center Wilt Chamberlain, who originally played for the barnstorming Harlem Globetrotters; all-around stars Oscar Robertson and Jerry West; more recent big men Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, Shaquille O'Neal, Hakeem Olajuwon and Karl Malone; playmakers John Stockton, Isiah Thomas and Steve Nash; crowd-pleasing forwards Julius Erving and Charles Barkley; European stars Dirk Nowitzki, Pau Gasol and Tony Parker; Latin American stars Manu Ginobili, more recent superstars, Allen Iverson, Kobe Bryant, Tim Duncan, LeBron James, Stephen Curry, Giannis Antetokounmpo, etc.; and the three players who many credit with ushering the professional game to its highest level of popularity during the 1980s and 1990s: Larry Bird, Earvin \"Magic\" Johnson, and Michael Jordan.In 2001, the NBA formed a developmental league, the National Basketball Development League (later known as the NBA D-League and then the NBA G League after a branding deal with Gatorade). As of the 2023\u201324 season, the G League has 31 teams.International basketballThe U.S. playing against Mexico at the 2014 FIBA World CupFIBA (International Basketball Federation) was formed in 1932 by eight founding nations: Argentina, Czechoslovakia, Greece, Italy, Latvia, Portugal, Romania and Switzerland. At this time, the organization only oversaw amateur players. Its acronym, derived from the French F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale de Basket-ball Amateur, was thus \"FIBA\". Men's basketball was first included at the Berlin 1936 Summer Olympics, although a demonstration tournament was held in 1904. The United States defeated Canada in the first final, played outdoors. This competition has usually been dominated by the United States, whose team has won all but three titles. The first of these came in a controversial final game in Munich in 1972 against the Soviet Union, in which the ending of the game was replayed three times until the Soviet Union finally came out on top.[34] In 1950 the first FIBA World Championship for men, now known as the FIBA Basketball World Cup, was held in Argentina. Three years later, the first FIBA World Championship for women, now known as the FIBA Women's Basketball World Cup, was held in Chile. Women's basketball was added to the Olympics in 1976, which were held in Montreal, Quebec, Canada with teams such as the Soviet Union, Brazil and Australia rivaling the American squads.In 1989, FIBA allowed professional NBA players to participate in the Olympics for the first time. Prior to the 1992 Summer Olympics, only European and South American teams were allowed to field professionals in the Olympics. The United States' dominance continued with the introduction of the original Dream Team. In the 2004 Athens Olympics, the United States suffered its first Olympic loss while using professional players, falling to Puerto Rico (in a 19-point loss) and Lithuania in group games, and being eliminated in the semifinals by Argentina. It eventually won the bronze medal defeating Lithuania, finishing behind Argentina and Italy. The Redeem Team, won gold at the 2008 Olympics, and the B-Team, won gold at the 2010 FIBA World Championship in Turkey despite featuring no players from the 2008 squad. The United States continued its dominance as they won gold at the 2012 Olympics, 2014 FIBA World Cup and the 2016 Olympics.A EuroLeague game in Moscow in 2018Worldwide, basketball tournaments are held for boys and girls of all age levels. The global popularity of the sport is reflected in the nationalities represented in the NBA. Players from all six inhabited continents currently play in the NBA. Top international players began coming into the NBA in the mid-1990s, including Croatians Dra\u017een Petrovi\u0107 and Toni Kuko\u010d, Serbian Vlade Divac, Lithuanians Arvydas Sabonis and \u0160ar\u016bnas Mar\u010diulionis, Dutchman Rik Smits and German Detlef Schrempf.In the Philippines, the Philippine Basketball Association's first game was played on April 9, 1975, at the Araneta Coliseum in Cubao, Quezon City, Philippines. It was founded as a \"rebellion\" of several teams from the now-defunct Manila Industrial and Commercial Athletic Association, which was tightly controlled by the Basketball Association of the Philippines (now defunct), the then-FIBA recognized national association. Nine teams from the MICAA participated in the league's first season that opened on April 9, 1975. The NBL is Australia's pre-eminent men's professional basketball league. The league commenced in 1979, playing a winter season (April\u2013September) and did so until the completion of the 20th season in 1998. The 1998\u201399 season, which commenced only months later, was the first season after the shift to the current summer season format (October\u2013April). This shift was an attempt to avoid competing directly against Australia's various football codes. It features 8 teams from around Australia and one in New Zealand. A few players including Luc Longley, Andrew Gaze, Shane Heal, Chris Anstey and Andrew Bogut made it big internationally, becoming poster figures for the sport in Australia. The Women's National Basketball League began in 1981.Women's basketballSee also: Women's basketballThe Smith College Class 1902 basketball teamThe Australian women's basketball team on winning the 2006 FIBA World Championship for WomenWomen began to play basketball in the fall of 1892 at Smith College through Senda Berenson, substitute director of the newly opened gymnasium and physical education teacher, after having modified the rules for women. Shortly after Berenson was hired at Smith, she visited Naismith to learn more about the game.[9] Fascinated by the new sport and the values it could teach, she instantly introduced the game as a class exercise and soon after teams were organized. The first women's collegiate basketball game was played on March 21, 1893, when her Smith freshmen and sophomores played against one another.[10][35] The first official women's interinstitutional game was played later that year between the University of California and the Miss Head's School.[11] In 1899, a committee was established at the Conference of Physical Training in Springfield to draw up general rules for women's basketball.[36] These rules, designed by Berenson, were published in 1899.[12] In 1902 Berenson became the editor of A. G. Spalding's first Women's Basketball Guide.[10] The same year women of Mount Holyoke and Sophie Newcomb College (coached by Clara Gregory Baer), began playing basketball. By 1895, the game had spread to colleges across the country, including Wellesley, Vassar, and Bryn Mawr. The first intercollegiate women's game was on April 4, 1896. Stanford women played Berkeley, 9-on-9, ending in a 2\u20131 Stanford victory.Women's basketball development was more structured than that for men in the early years. In 1905, the executive committee on Basket Ball Rules (National Women's Basketball Committee) was created by the American Physical Education Association.[37] These rules called for six to nine players per team and 11 officials. The International Women's Sports Federation (1924) included a women's basketball competition. 37 women's high school varsity basketball or state tournaments were held by 1925. And in 1926, the Amateur Athletic Union backed the first national women's basketball championship, complete with men's rules.[37] The Edmonton Grads, a touring Canadian women's team based in Edmonton, Alberta, operated between 1915 and 1940. The Grads toured all over North America, and were exceptionally successful. They posted a record of 522 wins and only 20 losses over that span, as they met any team that wanted to challenge them, funding their tours from gate receipts.[38] The Grads also shone on several exhibition trips to Europe, and won four consecutive exhibition Olympics tournaments, in 1924, 1928, 1932, and 1936; however, women's basketball was not an official Olympic sport until 1976. The Grads' players were unpaid, and had to remain single. The Grads' style focused on team play, without overly emphasizing skills of individual players. The first women's AAU All-America team was chosen in 1929.[37] Women's industrial leagues sprang up throughout the United States, producing famous athletes, including Babe Didrikson of the Golden Cyclones, and the All American Red Heads Team, which competed against men's teams, using men's rules. By 1938, the women's national championship changed from a three-court game to two-court game with six players per team.[37]Brittney Griner accepting an awardThe NBA-backed Women's National Basketball Association (WNBA) began in 1997. Though it had shaky attendance figures, several marquee players (Lisa Leslie, Diana Taurasi, and Candace Parker among others) have helped the league's popularity and level of competition. Other professional women's basketball leagues in the United States, such as the American Basketball League (1996\u201398), have folded in part because of the popularity of the WNBA. The WNBA has been looked at by many as a niche league. However, the league has recently taken steps forward. In June 2007, the WNBA signed a contract extension with ESPN. The new television deal ran from 2009 to 2016. Along with this deal, came the first-ever rights fees to be paid to a women's professional sports league. Over the eight years of the contract, \"millions and millions of dollars\" were \"dispersed to the league's teams.\" In a March 12, 2009, article, NBA commissioner David Stern said that in the bad economy, \"the NBA is far less profitable than the WNBA. We're losing a lot of money among a large number of teams. We're budgeting the WNBA to break even this year.\"[39]Rules and regulationsEnd of a match as the game clock shows no time leftMost important terms related to the basketball courtMain article: Rules of basketballMeasurements and time limits discussed in this section often vary among tournaments and organizations; international and NBA rules are used in this section.The object of the game is to outscore one's opponents by throwing the ball through the opponents' basket from above while preventing the opponents from doing so on their own. An attempt to score in this way is called a shot. A successful shot is worth two points, or three points if it is taken from beyond the three-point arc 6.75 metres (22\u00a0ft 2\u00a0in) from the basket in international games[40] and 23\u00a0feet 9\u00a0inches (7.24\u00a0m) in NBA games.[41] A one-point shot can be earned when shooting from the foul line after a foul is made. After a team has scored from a field goal or free throw, play is resumed with a throw-in awarded to the non-scoring team taken from a point beyond the endline of the court where the points were scored.[42]Playing regulationsGames are played in four quarters of 10 (FIBA)[43] or 12 minutes (NBA).[44] College men's games use two 20-minute halves,[45] college women's games use 10-minute quarters,[46] and most United States high school varsity games use 8-minute quarters; however, this varies from state to state.[47][48] 15 minutes are allowed for a half-time break under FIBA, NBA, and NCAA rules[45][49][50] and 10 minutes in United States high schools.[47] Overtime periods are five minutes in length[45][51][52] except for high school, which is four minutes in length.[47] Teams exchange baskets for the second half. The time allowed is actual playing time; the clock is stopped while the play is not active. Therefore, games generally take much longer to complete than the allotted game time, typically about two hours.Five players from each team may be on the court at one time.[53][54][55][56] Substitutions are unlimited but can only be done when play is stopped. Teams also have a coach, who oversees the development and strategies of the team, and other team personnel such as assistant coaches, managers, statisticians, doctors and trainers.For both men's and women's teams, a standard uniform consists of a pair of shorts and a jersey with a clearly visible number, unique within the team, printed on both the front and back. Players wear high-top sneakers that provide extra ankle support. Typically, team names, players' names and, outside of North America, sponsors are printed on the uniforms.A limited number of time-outs, clock stoppages requested by a coach (or sometimes mandated in the NBA) for a short meeting with the players, are allowed. They generally last no longer than one minute (100 seconds in the NBA) unless, for televised games, a commercial break is needed.The game is controlled by the officials consisting of the referee (referred to as crew chief in the NBA), one or two umpires (referred to as referees in the NBA) and the table officials. For college, the NBA, and many high schools, there are a total of three referees on the court. The table officials are responsible for keeping track of each team's scoring, timekeeping, individual and team fouls, player substitutions, team possession arrow, and the shot clock.EquipmentMain articles: Basketball (ball), Basketball court, and Backboard (basketball)Traditional eight-panel basketballThe only essential equipment in a basketball game is the ball and the court: a flat, rectangular surface with baskets at opposite ends. Competitive levels require the use of more equipment such as clocks, score sheets, scoreboards, alternating possession arrows, and whistle-operated stop-clock systems.An outdoor basketball netA regulation basketball court in international games is 28 meters (92 feet) long and 15 meters (49 feet) wide. In the NBA and NCAA the court is 94 by 50 feet (29 by 15 meters).[41] Most courts have wood flooring, usually constructed from maple planks running in the same direction as the longer court dimension.[57][58] The name and logo of the home team is usually painted on or around the center circle.The basket is a steel rim 18 inches (46\u00a0cm) diameter with an attached net affixed to a backboard that measures 6 by 3.5 feet (1.8 by 1.1 meters) and one basket is at each end of the court. The white outlined box on the backboard is 18 inches (46\u00a0cm) high and 2 feet (61\u00a0cm) wide. At almost all levels of competition, the top of the rim is exactly 10 feet (3.05 meters) above the court and 4 feet (1.22 meters) inside the baseline. While variation is possible in the dimensions of the court and backboard, it is considered important for the basket to be of the correct height \u2013 a rim that is off by just a few inches can have an adverse effect on shooting. The net must \"check the ball momentarily as it passes through the basket\" to aid the visual confirmation that the ball went through.[59]  The act of checking the ball has the further advantage of slowing down the ball so the rebound does not go as far.[60]The size of the basketball is also regulated. For men, the official ball is 29.5 inches (75\u00a0cm) in circumference (size 7, or a \"295 ball\") and weighs 22\u00a0oz (620\u00a0g). If women are playing, the official basketball size is 28.5 inches (72\u00a0cm) in circumference (size 6, or a \"285 ball\") with a weight of 20\u00a0oz (570\u00a0g). In 3x3, a formalized version of the halfcourt 3-on-3 game, a dedicated ball with the circumference of a size 6 ball but the weight of a size 7 ball is used in all competitions (men's, women's, and mixed teams).[61]ViolationsMain article: Violation (basketball)The ball may be advanced toward the basket by being shot, passed between players, thrown, tapped, rolled or dribbled (bouncing the ball while running).The ball must stay within the court; the last team to touch the ball before it travels out of bounds forfeits possession. The ball is out of bounds if it touches a boundary line, or touches any player or object that is out of bounds.There are limits placed on the steps a player may take without dribbling, which commonly results in an infraction known as traveling. Nor may a player stop their dribble and then resume dribbling. A dribble that touches both hands is considered stopping the dribble, giving this infraction the name double dribble. Within a dribble, the player cannot carry the ball by placing their hand on the bottom of the ball; doing so is known as carrying the ball. A team, once having established ball control in the front half of their court, may not return the ball to the backcourt and be the first to touch it. A violation of these rules results in loss of possession.The ball may not be kicked, nor be struck with the fist. For the offense, a violation of these rules results in loss of possession; for the defense, most leagues reset the shot clock and the offensive team is given possession of the ball out of bounds.There are limits imposed on the time taken before progressing the ball past halfway (8 seconds in FIBA and the NBA; 10 seconds in NCAA and high school for both sexes), before attempting a shot (24 seconds in FIBA, the NBA, and U Sports (Canadian universities) play for both sexes, and 30 seconds in NCAA play for both sexes), holding the ball while closely guarded (5 seconds), and remaining in the restricted area known as the free-throw lane, (or the \"key\") (3 seconds). These rules are designed to promote more offense.There are also limits on how players may block an opponent's field goal attempt or help a teammate's field goal attempt. Goaltending is a defender's touching of a ball that is on a downward flight toward the basket, while the related violation of basket interference is the touching of a ball that is on the rim or above the basket, or by a player reaching through the basket from below. Goaltending and basket interference committed by a defender result in awarding the basket to the offense, while basket interference committed by an offensive player results in cancelling the basket if one is scored. The defense gains possession in all cases of goaltending or basket interference.FoulsThe referee signals that a foul has been committed.Main articles: Personal foul (basketball) and Technical foulAn attempt to unfairly disadvantage an opponent through certain types of physical contact is illegal and is called a personal foul. These are most commonly committed by defensive players; however, they can be committed by offensive players as well. Players who are fouled either receive the ball to pass inbounds again, or receive one or more free throws if they are fouled in the act of shooting, depending on whether the shot was successful. One point is awarded for making a free throw, which is attempted from a line 15 feet (4.6\u00a0m) from the basket.The referee is responsible for judging whether contact is illegal, sometimes resulting in controversy. The calling of fouls can vary between games, leagues and referees.There is a second category of fouls called technical fouls, which may be charged for various rules violations including failure to properly record a player in the scorebook, or for unsportsmanlike conduct. These infractions result in one or two free throws, which may be taken by any of the five players on the court at the time. Repeated incidents can result in disqualification. A blatant foul involving physical contact that is either excessive or unnecessary is called an intentional foul (flagrant foul in the NBA). In FIBA and NCAA women's basketball, a foul resulting in ejection is called a disqualifying foul, while in leagues other than the NBA, such a foul is referred to as flagrant.If a team exceeds a certain limit of team fouls in a given period (quarter or half) \u2013 four for NBA, NCAA women's, and international games \u2013 the opposing team is awarded one or two free throws on all subsequent non-shooting fouls for that period, the number depending on the league. In the US college men's game and high school games for both sexes, if a team reaches 7 fouls in a half, the opposing team is awarded one free throw, along with a second shot if the first is made. This is called shooting \"one-and-one\". If a team exceeds 10 fouls in the half, the opposing team is awarded two free throws on all subsequent fouls for the half.When a team shoots foul shots, the opponents may not interfere with the shooter, nor may they try to regain possession until the last or potentially last free throw is in the air.After a team has committed a specified number of fouls, the other team is said to be \"in the bonus\". On scoreboards, this is usually signified with an indicator light reading \"Bonus\" or \"Penalty\" with an illuminated directional arrow or dot indicating that team is to receive free throws when fouled by the opposing team. (Some scoreboards also indicate the number of fouls committed.)If a team misses the first shot of a two-shot situation, the opposing team must wait for the completion of the second shot before attempting to reclaim possession of the ball and continuing play.If a player is fouled while attempting a shot and the shot is unsuccessful, the player is awarded a number of free throws equal to the value of the attempted shot. A player fouled while attempting a regular two-point shot thus receives two shots, and a player fouled while attempting a three-point shot receives three shots.If a player is fouled while attempting a shot and the shot is successful, typically the player will be awarded one additional free throw for one point. In combination with a regular shot, this is called a \"three-point play\" or \"four-point play\" (or more colloquially, an \"and one\") because of the basket made at the time of the foul (2 or 3 points) and the additional free throw (1 point).A foul committed during a shot attemptCommon techniques and practicesPositionsMain article: Basketball positionsBasketball positions in the offensive zoneAlthough the rules do not specify any positions whatsoever, they have evolved as part of basketball. During the early years of basketball's evolution, two guards, two forwards, and one center were used. In more recent times specific positions evolved, but the current trend, advocated by many top coaches including Mike Krzyzewski, is towards positionless basketball, where big players are free to shoot from outside and dribble if their skill allows it.[62] Popular descriptions of positions include:Point guard (often called the \"1\")\u00a0: usually the fastest player on the team, organizes the team's offense by controlling the ball and making sure that it gets to the right player at the right time.Shooting guard (the \"2\")\u00a0: creates a high volume of shots on offense, mainly long-ranged; and guards the opponent's best perimeter player on defense.Small forward (the \"3\")\u00a0: often primarily responsible for scoring points via cuts to the basket and dribble penetration; on defense seeks rebounds and steals, but sometimes plays more actively.Power forward (the \"4\"): plays offensively often with their back to the basket; on defense, plays under the basket (in a zone defense) or against the opposing power forward (in man-to-man defense).Center (the \"5\"): uses height and size to score (on offense), to protect the basket closely (on defense), or to rebound.The above descriptions are flexible. For most teams today, the shooting guard and small forward have very similar responsibilities and are often called the wings, as do the power forward and center, who are often called post players. While most teams describe two players as guards, two as forwards, and one as a center, on some occasions teams choose to call them by different designations.StrategyMain article: Basketball playbookThere are two main defensive strategies: zone defense and man-to-man defense. In a zone defense, each player is assigned to guard a specific area of the court. Zone defenses often allow the defense to double team the ball, a manoeuver known as a trap. In a man-to-man defense, each defensive player guards a specific opponent.Offensive plays are more varied, normally involving planned passes and movement by players without the ball. A quick movement by an offensive player without the ball to gain an advantageous position is known as a cut. A legal attempt by an offensive player to stop an opponent from guarding a teammate, by standing in the defender's way such that the teammate cuts next to him, is a screen or pick. The two plays are combined in the pick and roll, in which a player sets a pick and then \"rolls\" away from the pick towards the basket. Screens and cuts are very important in offensive plays; these allow the quick passes and teamwork, which can lead to a successful basket. Teams almost always have several offensive plays planned to ensure their movement is not predictable. On court, the point guard is usually responsible for indicating which play will occur.ShootingPlayer releases a short jump shot, while her defender is either knocked down, or trying to \"take a charge\".Shooting is the act of attempting to score points by throwing the ball through the basket, methods varying with players and situations.Typically, a player faces the basket with both feet facing the basket. A player will rest the ball on the fingertips of the dominant hand (the shooting arm) slightly above the head, with the other hand supporting the side of the ball. The ball is usually shot by jumping (though not always) and extending the shooting arm. The shooting arm, fully extended with the wrist fully bent, is held stationary for a moment following the release of the ball, known as a follow-through. Players often try to put a steady backspin on the ball to absorb its impact with the rim. The ideal trajectory of the shot is somewhat controversial, but generally a proper arc is recommended. Players may shoot directly into the basket or may use the backboard to redirect the ball into the basket.Basketball falling through hoopThe two most common shots that use the above described setup are the set shot and the jump shot. Both are preceded by a crouching action which preloads the muscles and increases the power of the shot. In a set shot, the shooter straightens up and throws from a standing position with neither foot leaving the floor; this is typically used for free throws. For a jump shot, the throw is taken in mid-air with the ball being released near the top of the jump. This provides much greater power and range, and it also allows the player to elevate over the defender. Failure to release the ball before the feet return to the floor is considered a traveling violation.Another common shot is called the layup. This shot requires the player to be in motion toward the basket, and to \"lay\" the ball \"up\" and into the basket, typically off the backboard (the backboard-free, underhand version is called a finger roll). The most crowd-pleasing and typically highest-percentage accuracy shot is the slam dunk, in which the player jumps very high and throws the ball downward, through the basket while touching it.Slow-motion animation of a dunkAnother shot that is less common than the layup, is the \"circus shot\". The circus shot is a low-percentage shot that is flipped, heaved, scooped, or flung toward the hoop while the shooter is off-balance, airborne, falling down or facing away from the basket. A back-shot is a shot taken when the player is facing away from the basket, and may be shot with the dominant hand, or both; but there is a very low chance that the shot will be successful.[63]A shot that misses both the rim and the backboard completely is referred to as an air ball. A particularly bad shot, or one that only hits the backboard, is jocularly called a brick. The hang time is the length of time a player stays in the air after jumping, either to make a slam dunk, layup or jump shot.ReboundingMain article: Rebound (basketball)A player making an offensive reboundThe objective of rebounding is to successfully gain possession of the basketball after a missed field goal or free throw, as it rebounds from the hoop or backboard. This plays a major role in the game, as most possessions end when a team misses a shot. There are two categories of rebounds: offensive rebounds, in which the ball is recovered by the offensive side and does not change possession, and defensive rebounds, in which the defending team gains possession of the loose ball. The majority of rebounds are defensive, as the team on defense tends to be in better position to recover missed shots; for example, about 75% of rebounds in the NBA are defensive.[64]PassingSee also: Assist (basketball)A pass is a method of moving the ball between players. Most passes are accompanied by a step forward to increase power and are followed through with the hands to ensure accuracy.A staple pass is the chest pass. The ball is passed directly from the passer's chest to the receiver's chest. A proper chest pass involves an outward snap of the thumbs to add velocity and leaves the defence little time to react.Another type of pass is the bounce pass. Here, the passer bounces the ball crisply about two-thirds of the way from his own chest to the receiver. The ball strikes the court and bounces up toward the receiver. The bounce pass takes longer to complete than the chest pass, but it is also harder for the opposing team to intercept (kicking the ball deliberately is a violation). Thus, players often use the bounce pass in crowded moments, or to pass around a defender.The overhead pass is used to pass the ball over a defender. The ball is released while over the passer's head.The outlet pass occurs after a team gets a defensive rebound. The next pass after the rebound is the outlet pass.The crucial aspect of any good pass is it being difficult to intercept. Good passers can pass the ball with great accuracy and they know exactly where each of their other teammates prefers to receive the ball. A special way of doing this is passing the ball without looking at the receiving teammate. This is called a no-look pass.Another advanced style of passing is the behind-the-back pass, which, as the description implies, involves throwing the ball behind the passer's back to a teammate. Although some players can perform such a pass effectively, many coaches discourage no-look or behind-the-back passes, believing them to be difficult to control and more likely to result in turnovers or violations.DribblingA demonstration of the basic types of dribbling in basketballA U.S. Naval Academy (\"Navy\") player, left, posts up a U.S. Military Academy (\"Army\") defender.Main article: DribbleDribbling is the act of bouncing the ball continuously with one hand and is a requirement for a player to take steps with the ball. To dribble, a player pushes the ball down towards the ground with the fingertips rather than patting it; this ensures greater control.When dribbling past an opponent, the dribbler should dribble with the hand farthest from the opponent, making it more difficult for the defensive player to get to the ball. It is therefore important for a player to be able to dribble competently with both hands.Good dribblers (or \"ball handlers\") tend to keep their dribbling hand low to the ground, reducing the distance of travel of the ball from the floor to the hand, making it more difficult for the defender to \"steal\" the ball. Good ball handlers frequently dribble behind their backs, between their legs, and switch directions suddenly, making a less predictable dribbling pattern that is more difficult to defend against. This is called a crossover, which is the most effective way to move past defenders while dribbling.A skilled player can dribble without watching the ball, using the dribbling motion or peripheral vision to keep track of the ball's location. By not having to focus on the ball, a player can look for teammates or scoring opportunities, as well as avoid the danger of having someone steal the ball away from him/her.BlockingMain article: Block (basketball)A block is performed when, after a shot is attempted, a defender succeeds in altering the shot by touching the ball. In almost all variants of play, it is illegal to touch the ball after it is in the downward path of its arc; this is known as goaltending. It is also illegal under NBA and Men's NCAA basketball to block a shot after it has touched the backboard, or when any part of the ball is directly above the rim. Under international rules it is illegal to block a shot that is in the downward path of its arc or one that has touched the backboard until the ball has hit the rim. After the ball hits the rim, it is again legal to touch it even though it is no longer considered as a block performed.To block a shot, a player has to be able to reach a point higher than where the shot is released. Thus, height can be an advantage in blocking. Players who are taller and playing the power forward or center positions generally record more blocks than players who are shorter and playing the guard positions. However, with good timing and a sufficiently high vertical leap, even shorter players can be effective shot blockers.HeightJoonas Suotamo, a Finnish-American former professional center, is 6\u00a0feet 11\u00a0inches (2.11\u00a0m) tall. Many professional centers' heights exceed 7 feet (2.13\u00a0m).At the professional level, most male players are above 6\u00a0feet 3\u00a0inches (1.91\u00a0m) and most women above 5\u00a0feet 7\u00a0inches (1.70\u00a0m). Guards, for whom physical coordination and ball-handling skills are crucial, tend to be the smallest players. Almost all forwards in the top men's pro leagues are 6\u00a0feet 6\u00a0inches (1.98\u00a0m) or taller. Most centers are over 6\u00a0feet 10\u00a0inches (2.08\u00a0m) tall. According to a survey given to all NBA teams,[when?] the average height of all NBA players is just under 6\u00a0feet 7\u00a0inches (2.01\u00a0m), with the average weight being close to 222 pounds (101\u00a0kg). The tallest players ever in the NBA were Manute Bol and Gheorghe Mure\u0219an, who were both 7\u00a0feet 7\u00a0inches (2.31\u00a0m) tall. At 7\u00a0feet 2\u00a0inches (2.18\u00a0m), Margo Dydek was the tallest player in the history of the WNBA.The shortest player ever to play in the NBA is Muggsy Bogues at 5\u00a0feet 3\u00a0inches (1.60\u00a0m).[65] Other average-height or relatively short players have thrived at the pro level, including Anthony \"Spud\" Webb, who was 5\u00a0feet 7\u00a0inches (1.70\u00a0m) tall, but had a 42-inch (1.1\u00a0m) vertical leap, giving him significant height when jumping, and Temeka Johnson, who won the WNBA Rookie of the Year Award and a championship with the Phoenix Mercury while standing only 5\u00a0feet 3\u00a0inches (1.60\u00a0m). While shorter players are often at a disadvantage in certain aspects of the game, their ability to navigate quickly through crowded areas of the court and steal the ball by reaching low are strengths.Players regularly inflate their height in high school or college. Many prospects exaggerate their height while in high school or college to make themselves more appealing to coaches and scouts, who prefer taller players. Charles Barkley stated; \"I've been measured at 6\u20135, 6-4+3\u20444. But I started in college at 6\u20136.\" Sam Smith, a former writer from the Chicago Tribune, said: \"We sort of know the heights, because after camp, the sheet comes out. But you use that height, and the player gets mad. And then you hear from his agent. Or you file your story with the right height, and the copy desk changes it because they have the 'official' N.B.A. media guide, which is wrong. So you sort of go along with the joke.\"[66]Since the 2019-20 NBA season heights of NBA players are recorded definitively by measuring players with their shoes off.[67]Variations and similar gamesMain article: Variations of basketballVariations of basketball are activities based on the game of basketball, using common basketball skills and equipment (primarily the ball and basket). Some variations only have superficial rule changes, while others are distinct games with varying degrees of influence from basketball. Other variations include children's games, contests or activities meant to help players reinforce skills.An earlier version of basketball, played primarily by women and girls, was six-on-six basketball. Horseball is a game played on horseback where a ball is handled and points are scored by shooting it through a high net (approximately 1.5m\u00d71.5m). The sport is like a combination of polo, rugby, and basketball. There is even a form played on donkeys known as Donkey basketball, which has attracted criticism from animal rights groups.Half-courtPerhaps the single most common variation of basketball is the half-court game, played in informal settings without referees or strict rules. Only one basket is used, and the ball must be \"taken back\" or \"cleared\" \u2013 passed or dribbled outside the three-point line each time possession of the ball changes from one team to the other. Half-court games require less cardiovascular stamina, since players need not run back and forth a full court. Half-court raises the number of players that can use a court or, conversely, can be played if there is an insufficient number to form full 5-on-5 teams.Half-court basketball is usually played 1-on-1, 2-on-2 or 3-on-3. The last of these variations is gradually gaining official recognition as 3x3, originally known as FIBA 33. It was first tested at the 2007 Asian Indoor Games in Macau and the first official tournaments were held at the 2009 Asian Youth Games and the 2010 Youth Olympics, both in Singapore. The first FIBA 3x3 Youth World Championships[68] were held in Rimini, Italy in 2011, with the first FIBA 3x3 World Championships for senior teams following a year later in Athens. The sport is highly tipped to become an Olympic sport as early as 2016.[69] In the summer of 2017, the BIG3 basketball league, a professional 3x3 half court basketball league that features former NBA players, began. The BIG3 features several rule variants including a four-point field goal.[70]Other variationsVariations of basketball with their own page or subsection include:21 (also known as American, cutthroat and roughhouse)[71]42Around the WorldBounceFiring SquadFivesH-O-R-S-EHotshotKnockoutOne-shot conquerSteal The BaconTip-itTips\"The One\"Basketball WarWater basketballBeach basketballStreetballOne-on-one is a variation in which two players will use only a small section of the court (often no more than a half of a court) and compete to play the ball into a single hoop. Such games tend to emphasize individual dribbling and ball stealing skills over shooting and team play.Dunk Hoops is a variation played on basketball hoops with lowered (under basketball regulation 10 feet) rims. It originated when the popularity of the slam dunk grew and was developed to create better chances for dunks with lowered rims and using altered goaltending rules.Unicycle basketball is played using a regulation basketball on a regular basketball court with the same rules, for example, one must dribble the ball while riding. There are a number of rules that are particular to unicycle basketball as well, for example, a player must have at least one foot on a pedal when in-bounding the ball. Unicycle basketball is usually played using 24\" or smaller unicycles, and using plastic pedals, both to preserve the court and the players' shins. Popular unicycle basketball games are organized in North America.[72]Spin-offs from basketball that are now separate sports include:Ringball, a traditional South African sport that stems from basketball, has been played since 1907. The sport is now promoted in South Africa, Namibia, Botswana, Lesotho, India, and Mauritius to establish Ringball as an international sport.Korfball (Dutch: Korfbal, korf meaning 'basket') started in the Netherlands and is now played worldwide as a mixed-gender team ball game, similar to mixed netball and basketball.Netball is a limited-contact team sport in which two teams of seven try to score points against one another by placing a ball through a high hoop. Australia New Zealand champions (so called ANZ Championship) is very famous in Australia and New Zealand as the premier netball league. Formerly played exclusively by women, netball today features mixed-gender competitions.Slamball, invented by television writer Mason Gordon, is a full-contact sport featuring trampolines. The main difference from basketball is the court; below the padded rim and backboard are four trampolines set into the floor, which serve to propel players to great heights for slam dunks. The rules also permit some physical contact between the members of the four-player teams. Professional games of Slamball aired on Spike TV in 2002, and the sport has since expanded to China and other countries.A basketball player in Israel, 1969Schoolgirls shooting hoops among the Himalayas in Dharamsala, India.A basketball training course at the Phan \u0110\u00ecnh Ph\u00f9ng High School, Hanoi, VietnamA basketball court in Tamil Nadu, IndiaA basketball court on Baana - Helsinki, Finland.Social forms of basketballTypical privately owned basketball hoopBasketball as a social and communal sport features environments, rules and demographics different from those seen in professional and televised basketball.Recreational basketballBasketball is played widely as an extracurricular, intramural or amateur sport in schools and colleges. Notable institutions of recreational basketball include:Basketball schools and academies, where students are trained in developing basketball fundamentals, undergo fitness and endurance exercises and learn various basketball skills. Basketball students learn proper ways of passing, ball handling, dribbling, shooting from various distances, rebounding, offensive moves, defense, layups, screens, basketball rules and basketball ethics. Also popular are the basketball camps organized for various occasions, often to get prepared for basketball events, and basketball clinics for improving skills.College and university basketball played in educational institutions of higher learning. This includes National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) intercollegiate basketball.Disabled basketballDeaf basketball: One of several deaf sports, deaf basketball relies on signing for communication. Any deaf sporting event that happens, its purpose is to serve as a catalyst for the socialization of a low-incidence and geographically dispersed population.[73]Wheelchair basketball: A sport based on basketball but designed for disabled people in wheelchairs and considered one of the major disabled sports practiced. There is a functional classification system that is used to help determine if the wheelchair basketball player classification system reflects the existing differences in the performance of elite female players. This system gives an analysis of the players' functional resources through field-testing and game observation. During this system's process, players are assigned a score of 1 to 4.5.[74]Other formsBiddy basketball played by minors, sometimes in formal tournaments, around the globe.Gay basketball played in LGBTQIA+ communities. The sport is a major event during the Gay Games, World Outgames and EuroGames.Midnight basketball, an initiative to curb inner-city crime in the United States and elsewhere by engaging youth in urban areas with sports as an alternative to drugs and crime.Rezball, short for reservation ball, is the avid Native American following of basketball, particularly a style of play particular to Native American teams of some areas.Fantasy basketballMain article: Fantasy basketballFantasy basketball was popularized during the 1990s by ESPN Fantasy Sports, NBA.com, and Yahoo! Fantasy Sports. On the model of fantasy baseball and football, players create fictional teams, select professional basketball players to \"play\" on these teams through a mock draft or trades, then calculate points based on the players' real-world performance.See alsoFor a topical guide, see Outline of basketball.Basketball portalSports portalBasketball movesBasketball National LeagueContinental Basketball AssociationGlossary of basketball termsIndex of basketball-related articlesList of basketball filmsList of basketball leaguesTimeline of women's basketballULEB, Union des Ligues Europ\u00e9ennes de Basket, in English Union of European Leagues of BasketballReferencesCitations^ Griffiths, Sian (September 20, 2010). \"The Canadian who invented basketball\". BBC News. Archived from the original on April 25, 2012. Retrieved September 14, 2011.^ \"Most watched sports in the world\". March 13, 2022.^ \"The Surge of the NBA's International Viewership and Popularity\". Forbes.com. June 14, 2012. Archived from the original on June 18, 2012. Retrieved June 14, 2012.^ \"REVEALED: The world's best paid teams, Man City close in on Barca and Real Madrid\". SportingIntelligence.com. May 1, 2012. Archived from the original on June 16, 2012. Retrieved June 11, 2012.^ (se) Nordisk Familjeboks Sportlexikon, part 4, korgboll, p. 939-940, edition 1938-1946, publisher F\u00f6rlagsaktiebolaget A. Sohlman & Co, Stockholm (via Runeberg project)^ de Bry, Theodor; Le Moyne de Morgues, Jacques (1591). \"Illustrationen - 85\". Wahrhafftige Abconterfaytung der Wilden (in German). Frankfurt am Main: J. Feyerabend & J. Wechel. p.\u00a085. Darnach spielen sie auch mit dem Ballen auf nachfolgende weise: Mitten auf einem weiten Platz wirdt ihnen ein Baum auffgerichtet / acht oder neun Ehlen hoch / darauff ist etwas viereckichtes / aus Binzen geflochten / geleget / welcher sich nun brauchet / und dasselbige mit dem Ballen trifft / der bekompt etwas sonderlichs zu Lohn.^ \"YMCA International \u2013 World Alliance of YMCAs: Basketball\u00a0: a YMCA Invention\". www.ymca.int. Archived from the original on March 14, 2016. Retrieved March 22, 2016.^ \"The Greatest Canadian Invention\". CBC News. Archived from the original on December 3, 2010.^ a b \"Pioneers in Physical Education\". pp.\u00a0661\u2013662. Archived from the original on June 20, 2009. Retrieved June 3, 2009.^ a b c \"Senda Berenson Papers\". Archived from the original on February 3, 2016. Retrieved June 3, 2009.^ a b Jenkins, Sally. \"History of Women's Basketball\". WNBA.com. Archived from the original on January 6, 2013. Retrieved January 21, 2014.^ a b Senda Berenson Abbott, Luther Halsey Gulick (director YMCA physical education department), Theodore Hough, A. Bertha Foster (1901). Basket Ball for Women. American Sports Publishing Company, New York. Today there are few gymnasia for women where basket ball is not a part of their curriculum, and hundreds of basket ball teams are formed yearly in all our cities by women who play the game at regular times during the winter. It is by far the most popular game that women play. (Editorial){{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)^ Leather Head Naismith Style Lace Up Basketball Archived September 11, 2016, at the Wayback Machine (The New York Times. Retrieved August 28, 2016)^ Jeep (July 16, 2012). \"Passion Drives Creation \u2013 Jeep\u00ae & USA Basketball\". Archived from the original on July 17, 2012 \u2013 via YouTube.^ Inflatable ball, Inventor: Frank Dieterle, Patent: US 1660378 A (1928) Archived November 23, 2016, at the Wayback Machine The description in this patent explains problems caused by lacing on the cover of basketballs.^ Naismith, James (1941). Basketball\u00a0: its origin and development. New York: Association Press.^ \"James Naismith Biography\". February 14, 2007. Archived from the original on February 5, 2007. Retrieved February 14, 2007.^ Thinkquest, Basketball. Retrieved January 20, 2009.^ \"Newly found documents shed light on basketball's birth\". ESPN.com. November 14, 2006. Retrieved July 29, 2022.^ \"Basketball\". olympic.org. June 26, 2010. Archived from the original on September 20, 2009. Retrieved December 18, 2005.[dubious  \u2013 discuss]^ \"Newly found documents shed light on basketball's birth\". ESPN. Associated Press. November 13, 2006. Archived from the original on December 1, 2007. Retrieved January 11, 2007.^ Fuoco, Linda (April 15, 2010). \"Grandson of basketball's inventor brings game's exhibit to Geneva College\". Postgazette.com. Archived from the original on October 11, 2011. Retrieved June 3, 2011.^ \"Hamline University Athletics: Hutton Arena\". Hamline.edu. January 4, 1937. Archived from the original on May 28, 2010. Retrieved July 25, 2010.^ \"1st Ever Public Basketball Game Played...\" www.rarenewspapers.com. Archived from the original on March 20, 2016.^ \"1st Ever Public Basketball Game Played\". Rare & Early Newspapers. March 12, 1892. Archived from the original on March 20, 2016. Retrieved March 22, 2016.^ Queen's Journal, vol. 31, no. 7, February 16, 1904; 105 years of Canadian university basketball, by Earl Zukerman, \"broken link\". Archived from the original on October 1, 2018. Retrieved February 6, 2009.^ 2008\u201309 High School Athletics Participation Survey NFHS.^ \"2016\u201317 High School Athletics Participation Survey\" (PDF). National Federation of State High School Associations. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 25, 2018. Retrieved February 16, 2018.^ \"National Interscholastic Basketball Tournament \u2013 hoopedeia.nba.com \u2013 Retrieved September 13, 2009\". Hoopedia.nba.com. Archived from the original on August 10, 2010. Retrieved July 25, 2010.^ \"National Catholic Interscholastic Basketball Tournament, 1924\u20131941 \u2013 hoopedia.nba.com \u2013 Retrieved September 13, 2009\". Hoopedia.nba.com. December 7, 1941. Archived from the original on August 10, 2010. Retrieved July 25, 2010.^ \"National Catholic Invitations Basketball Tournament \u2013 hoopedia.nba.com \u2013 Retrieved September 13, 2009\". Hoopedia.nba.com. Archived from the original on August 10, 2010. Retrieved July 25, 2010.^ \"\u2013 National Interscholastic Basketball Tournament for Black High Schools, 1929\u20131942 \u2013 Retrieved September 13, 2009\". Hoopedia.nba.com. Archived from the original on August 10, 2010. Retrieved July 25, 2010.^ \"National Invitational Interscholastic Basketball Tournament \u2013 hoopedia.nba.com \u2013 Retrieved September 13, 2009\". Hoopedia.nba.com. Archived from the original on August 10, 2010. Retrieved July 25, 2010.^ Golden, Daniel (July 23, 2012). \"Three Seconds at 1972 Olympics Haunt U.S. Basketball\". Bloomberg Business Week. Archived from the original on January 9, 2015. Retrieved November 18, 2014.^ Peacock-Broyles, Trinity. \"You Come in as a Squirrel and Leave as an Owl\". Smith.edu. Archived from the original on June 15, 2011. Retrieved June 3, 2011.^ The conference took place at the YMCA training school - see newsclip (archived)^ a b c d \"Historical Timeline\". Archived from the original on June 21, 2009. Retrieved June 2, 2009.^ \"The Great Teams\". Archived from the original on August 12, 2010. Retrieved June 2, 2009.^ Television New Zealand, BASKETBALL | NBA getting through tough times Archived March 18, 2015, at the Wayback Machine^ \"Everything You Need to Know About Basketball Court Dimensions | PROformance Hoops\". proformancehoops.com. June 7, 2019. Retrieved January 8, 2021.^ a b \"Official Rules of the National Basketball Association 2013\u20132014\" (PDF). NBA.com. pp.\u00a08\u20139. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 12, 2018.^ \"NBA Official Rules 2018\u201319\" (PDF). pp.\u00a029\u201330. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022. Retrieved May 28, 2020.^ FIBA Official Basketball Rules (2010) Rule 4, Section 8.1 Retrieved July 26, 2010^ NBA Official Rules (2009\u20132010) Archived January 11, 2012, at the Wayback Machine Rule 5, Section II, a. Retrieved July 26, 2010.^ a b c 2009\u20132011 Men's & Women's Basketball Rules Archived August 6, 2012, at the Wayback Machine Rule 5, Section 6, Article 1. Retrieved July 26, 2010.^ \"NCAA panel approves women's basketball rules changes\". ESPN.com. Associated Press. June 8, 2015. Archived from the original on June 9, 2015. Retrieved June 9, 2015.^ a b c Struckhoff, Mary, ed. (2009). 2009\u20132010 NFHS Basketball Rules. Indianapolis, Indiana: National Federation of High Schools. p.\u00a041. Rule 5, Section 5, Article 1^ Stewart, Mark (June 25, 2015). \"Varsity basketball games will have two 18-minute halves next season\". Journal Sentinel. Archived from the original on July 11, 2018. Retrieved July 11, 2018.^ NBA Official Rules (2009\u20132010) Archived January 11, 2012, at the Wayback Machine Rule 5, Section II, c. Retrieved July 26, 2010.^ FIBA Official Basketball Rules (2010) Rule 4, Section 8.4 Retrieved July 26, 2010^ NBA Official Rules (2009\u20132010) Archived January 11, 2012, at the Wayback Machine Rule 5, Section II, b. Retrieved July 26, 2010.^ FIBA Official Basketball Rules (2010) Rule 4, Section 8.7 Retrieved July 26, 2010^ FIBA Official Basketball Rules (2010) Rule 3, Section 4.2.2 Retrieved July 26, 2010^ NBA Official Rules (2009\u20132010) Archived January 11, 2012, at the Wayback Machine Rule 3, Section I, a. Retrieved July 26, 2010.^ 2009\u20132011 Men's & Women's Basketball Rules Archived August 6, 2012, at the Wayback Machine Rule 10, Section 2, Article 6. Retrieved July 26, 2010.^ Struckhoff, Mary, ed. (2009). 2009\u20132010 NFHS Basketball Rules. Indianapolis, Indiana: National Federation of High Schools. p.\u00a059. Rule 10, Section 1, Article 6^ Lynch, William. \"What Are the Different Types of Basketball Court Surfaces?\". Archived from the original on March 23, 2016. Retrieved March 22, 2016.^ \"What Are the Different Types of Basketball Court Surfaces?\". LIVESTRONG. February 7, 2014. Archived from the original on March 23, 2016. Retrieved March 22, 2016.^ \"Official Rules, RULE NO. 1: Court Dimensions \u2013 Equipment\". National Basketball Association. October 15, 2018.^ Moniz, Brian (August 28, 2020). \"Why Do Basketball Hoops Have Nets?\". BasketballWorld.^ \"Wilson to provide the Official Game Ball for FIBA\" (Press release). Amer Sports. June 9, 2015. Archived from the original on September 3, 2015. Retrieved August 17, 2015.^ Marshall, John (November 1, 2014). \"Positionless basketball taking hold in college\". Archived from the original on November 29, 2014. Retrieved November 18, 2014.^ \"WATCH: Curry pulls off circus shot and gets a foul\". ABS-CBN News. November 17, 2016. Retrieved January 8, 2021.^ \"2022\u201323 NBA Season Summary\". Basketball-Reference.com. Retrieved April 18, 2023.^ \"Muggsy Bogues Bio\". NBA.com. Archived from the original on July 17, 2010. Retrieved July 25, 2010.^ Noah Liberman (June 22, 2008). \"When Height Becomes a Tall Tale\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 13, 2018. Retrieved February 1, 2019.^ \"For years, some NBA players lied about their height. They can't anymore\". Washington Post. Retrieved August 8, 2021.^ \"2011 3x3 Youth World Championship\". FIBA.com. September 11, 2011. Archived from the original on November 13, 2012. Retrieved November 22, 2012.^ Thomas, Vincent. \"3-on-3 basketball might become big time?\". ESPN. ESPN Internet Ventures. Archived from the original on February 1, 2013. Retrieved January 11, 2011.^ AP (June 26, 2017). \"Big3 begins: Ice Cube's new 3-on-3 league starts with a bang\". USA Today. Gannett. Archived from the original on December 10, 2017. Retrieved September 29, 2019.^ Eric Shanburn (2008). Basketball and Baseball Games: For the Driveway, Field Or the Alleyway. AuthorHouse. ISBN\u00a0978-1-4343-8912-1. Retrieved June 29, 2010.^ \"Comcast SportsNet Feature about Berkeley Unicycle Basketball\". Retrieved April 7, 2020.[permanent dead link]^ Stewart, David Alan (1991). Deaf Sport: the Impact of Sports within the Deaf Community. Gallaudet University Press. pp.\u00a0234. ISBN\u00a09780930323745.^ Vanlandewijck, Yves C; Evaggelinou, Christina; Daly, Daniel J; Verellen, Joeri; Van Houtte, Siska; Aspeslagh, Vanessa; Hendrickx, Robby; Piessens, Tine; Zwakhoven, Bjorn (December 3, 2003). \"The Relationship between Functional Potential and Field Performance in Elite Female Wheelchair Basketball Players\". Journal of Sports Sciences. 22 (7). Taylor & Francis: 668\u2013675. doi:10.1080/02640410310001655750. OCLC\u00a023080411. PMID\u00a015370498. S2CID\u00a027418917.General referencesNational Basketball Association (2014). \"Official Rules of the National Basketball Association\" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 6, 2015.International Basketball Federation (June 2004). Official Basketball Rules. Archived from the original on December 22, 2005.Reimer, Anthony (June 2005). \"FIBA vs North American Rules Comparison\". FIBA Assist (14): 40\u201344. Archived from the original on January 29, 2009. Retrieved January 11, 2006.Bonsor, Kevin (March 10, 2003). \"How Basketball Works: Who's Who\". HowStuffWorks. Archived from the original on January 1, 2006. Retrieved January 11, 2006.Further readingAdolph H, Grundman (2004). The golden age of amateur basketball: the AAU Tournament, 1921\u20131968. University of Nebraska Press. ISBN\u00a00-8032-7117-4.Batchelor, Bob (2005). Basketball in America: from the playgrounds to Jordan's game and beyond. Routledge. ISBN\u00a0978-0-7890-1613-3.Brown, Donald H (2007). A Basketball Handbook. AuthorHouse. ISBN\u00a0978-1-4259-6190-9.Coleman, Brian (1991). All You Wanted to Know About Basketball. Sterling publishing. ISBN\u00a081-207-2576-X.Grundy, Pamela; Susan Shackelford (2005). Shattering the glass: the remarkable history of women's basketball. New Press. ISBN\u00a01-56584-822-5.Herzog, Brad (2003). Hoopmania: The Book of Basketball History and Trivia. Rosen Pub. Group. ISBN\u00a00-8239-3697-X.Naismith, James (1941). Basketball: its origin and development. University of Nebraska Press. ISBN\u00a00-8032-8370-9.Simmons, Bill (2009). The book of basketball: the NBA according to the sports guy. Ballantine/ESPN Books. ISBN\u00a0978-0-345-51176-8. history of Basketball.External linksBasketball  at Wikipedia's sister projectsDefinitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from WikiversityLibrary resources about  Basketball Online booksResources in your libraryResources in other librariesHistoricalBasketball Hall of Fame \u2013 Springfield, MANational Basketball Foundation\u00a0\u2013 runs the Naismith Museum in OntarioHometown Sports Heroes Archived April 2, 2015, at the Wayback MachineOrganizationsBasketball at the Olympic GamesInternational Basketball FederationNational Basketball AssociationWomen's National Basketball AssociationContinental Basketball Association (oldest professional basketball league in the world)National Wheelchair Basketball AssociationOther sources\"Basketball\". Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica Online.Basketball at CurlieEurobasket websiteBasketball-Reference.com: Basketball Statistics, Analysis and History Archived February 22, 2011, at the Wayback MachineOntario's Historical Plaques \u2013 Dr. James Naismith (1861\u20131939)vteBasketballGeneral topicsGlossary of termsIndex of articlesLeaguesFIBANBAAAUHistoryJames NaismithProtocol of StockholmVariationsSlamballStreetballOne-on-oneTwenty-oneThree-on-threeSix-on-sixWheelchairRulesJump ballOfficialsTurnoverTrent Tucker RuleViolations3 secondsOffenseDefense5 secondsTime line (8/10 seconds)Basket interferenceCarryingDouble dribbleGoaltendingShot clockTravelingFoulsFlagrantPersonalTechnicalBonusThree-point playFour-point playGame playPositionsSixth manGuardPointShootingComboForwardSmallPowerStretchPointCenterStatisticsPlayer trackingWinning streaksOffensePointField goalThree-pointerReboundAssist50\u201340\u201390 club100-point scorersDefenseBlockStealMovesDribbleCrossoverEuro stepFlopScreenBack screenSlashingShootingFree throwJump shotFadeawayLayupFinger rollSlam dunkPosterizedAlley-oopBackboard shatteringHook shotAir ballBuzzer beaterUncontestedStrategyGeneralPlaybookPracticeShootaroundDrillsMikanTipOffenseBall hogGravityContinuityFlexShuffleUCLA High PostWheelFour cornersPick and rollTriangleMotionPrincetonDribble driveFast breakFlyCherry pickingRun and gunGrinnell SystemNellie BallSmall ballDefenseDouble teamFull-court pressHack-a-ShaqJordan RulesMan-to-manZone1\u20132\u20131\u201311\u20133\u201312\u20133LineMatch-upHybridAmoebaBox-and-oneTriangle-and-twoEquipmentBackboardBallBasketRim (Breakaway rim)CourtGlassHalf courtKeyNetWhistleClothingUniformSleeveFinger sleeveAir JordanChuck Taylor All-StarsMediaList of filmsTrading cards\u00a0Basketball portalOutline of basketballArticles related to basketballvteFIBAFIBA Central BoardFIBA CongressBasketball at the Summer OlympicsWorld Olympic Qualifying TournamentMen's national teamsWomen's national teamsBasketball codesRules5-on-53x3History of basketballProtocol of StockholmOutline of basketballVariations of basketballRegional officesFIBA AfricaFIBA AmericasFIBA AsiaFIBA EuropeFIBA OceaniaMen's national team tournamentsFIBA Basketball World CupUnder-19Under-17FIBA 3x3 World CupUnder-23Under-18FIBA Stankovi\u0107 CupFIBA Diamond Ball (former)Women's national team tournamentsFIBA Women's World CupUnder-19Under-17FIBA 3x3 World CupUnder-23Under-18Men's club tournamentsFIBA Intercontinental CupFIBA International Christmas Tournament (former)Women's club tournamentsFIBA Women's World League (former)PresidentsJames Naismith (1936, honorary)L\u00e9on Bouffard (1932\u20131948)Willard N. Greim (1948\u20131960)Antonio dos Reis Carneiro (1960\u20131968)Abdel Moneim Wahby (1968\u20131976)Gonzalo Puyat II (1976\u20131984)Robert Busnel (1984\u20131990)George E. Killian (1990\u20131998)Abdoulaye Seye Moreau (1998\u20132002)Carl Men-Ky Ching (2002\u20132006)Robert Elphinston (2006\u20132010)Yvan Mainini (2010\u20132014)Horacio Muratore (2014\u20132019)Hamane Niang (2019\u20132023)Sheikh Saud Ali Al Thani (2023-present)Secretaries GeneralRenato William Jones (1932\u20131976)Borislav Stankovi\u0107 (1976\u20132002)Patrick Baumann (2002\u20132018)Andreas Zagklis (2018\u2013present)AwardsFIBA Hall of FameMembersFIBA AwardsFIBA Order of MeritFIBA's 50 Greatest Players (1991)RankingsFIBA Men's World RankingFIBA Women's World RankingOthersFIBA\u2013EuroLeague disputeFIBA eligibility rulesBasketball Without BordersNaismith Trophy Basketball portal CategoryvteInternational men's basketballFIBANational teamsOlympicsWorld CupUniversiadeU-21 World CupU-19 World CupU-17 World CupDBB U-18 InvitationalTBF U-16 InvitationalWorld RankingAfricaFIBA Africa \u2013 AfroBasketAfroCanU-18U-16African GamesBasketball Africa League (BAL)AmericasFIBA Americas \u2013 FIBA AmeriCupU-18U-16CBC ChampionshipCentrobasketCOCABA ChampionshipMarchand CupPan American GamesSouth American ChampionshipBasketball Champions League Americas (BCLA)AsiaFIBA Asia \u2013 FIBA Asia Cup (includes Oceania)U-18U-16Asian GamesFIBA Asia ChallengeBasketball Champions League AsiaStankovi\u0107 CupEast Asian ChampionshipEast Asian GamesSABA ChampionshipSEABA ChampionshipSouth Asian GamesSoutheast Asian GamesWest Asian ChampionshipWest Asian GamesWilliam Jones CupASEAN Basketball LeagueEuropeFIBA Europe \u2013 EuroBasketU-20U-18U-16Acropolis TournamentAdecco CupBelgrade TrophyFIBA European Championship for Small CountriesGames of the Small States of EuropeWorld Cup (Turkey)Basketball Champions League (BCL)OceaniaFIBA Oceania \u2013 FIBA Oceania Championship (defunct)U-20U-17U-15Pacific GamesOthertournamentsFIBA Intercontinental CupArab Basketball ChampionshipArab GamesCommonwealth GamesDiamond BallFIBA World Olympic Qualifying TournamentLusophone GamesMediterranean GamesNote: The Under-21 Championship is no longer held.\u00a0Basketball portalvteInternational women's basketballFIBAWorld RankingTeamsOlympicsYouthWorld CupU21U19U17UniversiadeAfricaAfroBasket WomenU20U18U16AmericasAmeriCupU20U18U16Caribbean ChampionshipU20CentrobasketU17Central American ChampionshipU21South American Championship2nd tierU21U17U15AsiaAsia Cup (includes Oceania)U20U18U16Discovery Women's Basketball InvitationalWilliam Jones CupEuropeEuroBasket WomenU-20U-18U-16European Championship for Small CountriesOceaniaOceania Championship (defunct)U17U15Melanesia CupPolynesian CupOthertournamentsAfrican GamesArab ChampionshipArab GamesASEAN University GamesAsian GamesBolivarian GamesCentral Asian GamesCentral American and Caribbean GamesCentral American GamesCommonwealth GamesMediterranean GamesMicronesian GamesEuropean GamesEYOFGames of the Small States of EuropePacific GamesPan American GamesSoutheast Asian GamesNote: The Under-21 Championship is no longer held.\u00a0\u2022  \u00a0Basketball portalvteMen's basketball leaguesFIBAFIBA Intercontinental CupNational Basketball AssociationNBA vs. international teamsNBA vs. EuroLeagueAfricaAlgeriaAngola2ndBeninBotswanaBurundiCameroonCentral African RepublicEgyptGuineaIvory CoastKenyaLiberiaLibyaMadagascarMaliMoroccoMozambiqueNigeriaRwanda2ndSenegalSeychellesSouth AfricaBNLNationalTanzaniaTunisiaUgandaZambiaAmericasArgentina2ndBoliviaBrazil2ndCanadaNBA G LeagueNBLCCEBLChileColombiaCubaDominican Republic (Torneo Superior de Baloncesto)EcuadorEl SalvadorMexicoCIBACOPANBA G LeagueNicaraguaPanamaParaguayPeruPuerto RicoUnited StatesNBA G LeagueUruguayVenezuelaAsiaBahrainChinaNBLHong KongIndiaIndonesiaIranIraqJapanJordanKazakhstanKuwaitLebanonMalaysiaMongoliaOmanPhilippinesPBAPBA D-LeagueMPBLNBL\u2013PilipinasPSLQatarSaudi ArabiaSingaporeSouth KoreaSyriaTaiwanP. League+T1 LeagueSBLThailandUnited Arab EmiratesVietnamEuropeAlbania2ndAustria2ndArmeniaAzerbaijanBelarusBelgiumBosnia and Herzegovina2nd \u2013 RSBulgariaCroatia2ndCyprusNorthCzech RepublicDenmarkEstoniaFinland2ndFrance2nd3rdGeorgiaGermany2nd3rdGreat BritainEnglandScotlandGreece2ndHungaryIcelandIrelandIsrael2nd3rdItaly2nd3rdKosovo2ndLatviaLithuania2nd3rdLuxembourgMoldovaMontenegroNetherlandsNorth MacedoniaNorwayPoland2ndPortugal2ndRomaniaRussia2ndSerbia2nd3rd4thSlovakiaSloveniaSpain2nd3rdSweden2nd3rdSwitzerland2ndTurkey2nd3rdUkraine2ndOceaniaAustraliaNew ZealandInternationaltournamentsAfricaBasketball Africa LeagueArab Club Basketball ChampionshipAmericasFIBA Champions League AmericasFIBA South American LeagueAsiaBasketball Champions League AsiaEast Asia Super LeagueWest Asia Super LeagueASEAN LeagueArab Club Basketball ChampionshipAsiaBasketEuropeEuroLeagueEuroCupFIBA Champions LeagueFIBA Europe CupVTB United LeagueAdriatic League2ndAlpe Adria CupBalkan LeagueCaucasus Basketball LeagueEuropean North Basketball LeagueLatvian\u2013Estonian Basketball LeagueLiga UnikeDefuncttournamentsAfricaFIBA Africa Basketball LeagueAmericasFIBA Americas LeaguePan American ChampionshipSouth American ChampionshipTorneo InterLigasArgentinaBrazilChileUnited StatesABACBAUSBLUruguayAsiaABA Club ChampionshipWABA Champions CupJapanbj leagueNBLNBDLJBLTaiwanEuropeSuproLeagueSaporta CupKora\u0107 CupEuroChallengeEuroCup ChallengeBaltic LeagueCentral European LeagueLatin CupNorth European LeagueCzechoslovakiaEnglandRussiaSerbia and Montenegro2ndSpainSoviet UnionTurkeyYugoslavia2nd CategoryvteWomen's basketball leaguesFIBAWomen's World League (defunct)Other leaguesAfricaAlgeriaAngolaBeninBotswanaBurkina FasoBurundiCameroonCape VerdeCentral African RepublicChadDR CongoEgyptGabonGambiaGhanaIvory CoastKenyaLesothoLiberiaLibyaMadagascarMoroccoMozambiqueNamibiaNigeriaSouth AfricaSenegalSeychellesSwazilandTunisiaUgandaZimbabweAmericasArgentinaBrazilCanadaChileColombiaCosta RicaCubaDominicaDominican RepublicEcuadorMexicoParaguayPeruPuerto RicoUnited StatesU.S. Minor: WBDANCAAUruguayVenezuelaAsiaBahrainChinaHong KongIndiaIndonesiaIranIraqJapanJordanKazakhstanKyrgyzstanKuwaitLebanonMalaysiaMongoliaPhilippinesOmanQatarSaudi ArabiaSingaporeSouth KoreaSyriaTaiwanThailandUnited Arab EmiratesEuropeAlbaniaArmeniaAustriaBelarusBelgiumBosnia and HerzegovinaBulgariaCroatiaCyprusNorthCzech RepublicDenmarkEstoniaFinlandFranceGermanyGreat BritainEnglandScotlandGreece2nd divisionHungaryIcelandIrelandIsraelItalyKosovoLatviaLithuaniaLuxembourgMaltaMoldaviaMacedoniaMontenegroNetherlandsNorwayPolandPortugalRomaniaRussiaSerbiaSlovakiaSloveniaSpain2nd divisionSwedenSwitzerlandTurkey2nd divisionUkraineOceaniaAustraliaFijiNew ZealandInternationaltournamentsAfricaAfrican Champions CupArab Club ChampionshipAmericasSouth American ChampionshipsEuropeEuroLeague WomenEuroCup WomenEurope SuperCupAdriatic LeagueBaltic LeagueCentral Europe LeagueEastern European LeagueDefunct leaguesAmericasCentral American ChampionshipsEuropeRonchetti CupVojko Herksel CupMiddle European LeagueAdriatic Friendly LeagueCzechoslovakiaEast GermanySoviet UnionSerbia and MontenegroYugoslaviaUnited Kingdom (old league)vteTeam sportsSportGoverning bodiesNational sportSportspeopleInvasion gamesBasket sportsBasketballbeachdeaf3x3waterwheelchairCestoballDueballKorfballNetballFast5indoorwheelchairRezballRingballSlamballFootballcodesAssociation footballamputeebeach soccerfreestylefutsalIndoor soccerminifootballparalympicpowerchairroller soccersoccastreetteqball\u200eAustralian rules footballAFLXLightning footballMetro footyNine-a-sideRec footyGaelic footballLadies'Circle rules footballGridiron codesAmerican footballeight-manflagnine-mansix-mansprinttouchwheelchairArena footballCanadian footballHybrid codesAustusEton wall gameInternational rules footballSamoa rulesSpeedballSwedish footballUniversal footballVolataMedieval/historicalfootball codesBa gameCaidCalcio fiorentinoCampingCnapanCornish hurlingCujuHarpastumKemariLa souleLelo burtiMarn grookPasuckuakohowogRoyal ShrovetideUppies and downiesRugby codesRugby leaguemastersmodninessevenstagwheelchairRugby unionAmerican flagbeachminisevenssnowtagTambotouchtensXTouchWheelchairOther related codesCujuK\u012b-o-rahiJegichagiYubi lakpiStick-and-ballsportsBandoCammagGateballHurlingCamogieSuper11sShinty\u2013HurlingIndigenous North American stickballIomainKnattleikrKnottyLacrossebox/indoorfieldintercrossewomen'sRitinisShintyShinty\u2013HurlingHockey sportsBall hockeyBandyrinkBroomballField hockeyindoorFloor hockeyFloorballIce hockeypondpowerice sledgeRingetteRinkballRoller hockeyin-linequadRossall hockeyShinnyStreet hockeyUnderwater hockeyUnicycle hockeyPolo sportsAuto poloCowboy poloCycle poloElephant poloHobby horse poloHorseballMotoballPatoPoloArena poloChovganSnow poloPolocrosseSegway poloYak poloOther ball sportsAngleballCycle ballDodgeballFlickerballGain-groundBalle \u00e0 la mainBallon au poingJeu de paumeLongue paumeGoalballHandballbeachCzechfieldwheelchairKaatsenKin-BallLagoriMesoamerican ballgamePelota mixtecaPrisonballPushballQuidditchRoll ballTamburelloTchoukballUlamaValencian pilotaLlarguesWhirlyballYukigassenBat-and-ballgamesBaseballBaseball5Br\u00e4nnbollCorkballCricketOne DayTestTwenty20Danish longballIndoor cricketKickballLaptaMatballOin\u0103Over-the-linePes\u00e4palloRoundersSchlagballSoftballFastpitch16-inchStickballStoolballTown ballVigoroVitillaBritish baseballEnglish baseballWelsh baseballWiffle ballWireballNet and wall gamesBall badmintonBiribolBossaballFistballFivesEtonRugbyFootbag netFootball tennisFootvolleyJianziJokguNewcomb ballPetecaSepak takrawThrowballVolleyballbeachindoorparalympicpioneerballsnowTag sportsKabaddiKho khoWorld Chase TagWater sportsSynchronized swimmingUnderwater footballUnderwater rugbyWater polocanoeinner tubeOther non-ball sportsAirsoftBo-taoshiBuzkashiCombat (juggling)CurlingwheelchairGutsHornussenJereedMakura-NagePaintballRoller derbySynchronized skatingTug of warUltimatevte Summer Olympic sportsCore programAquaticsArtisticDivingMarathon SwimmingSwimmingWater poloArcheryAthleticsBadmintonBasketball3x3BoxingCanoeingCanoe slalomCanoe sprintCyclingBMX racingFreestyle BMXMountain bikingRoad cyclingTrack cyclingEquestrianDressageEventingShow jumpingFencingField hockeyFootballGolfGymnasticsArtistic gymnasticsRhythmic gymnasticsTrampoliningHandballJudoModern pentathlonRowingRugby sevensSailingShootingTable tennisTaekwondoTennisTriathlonVolleyballBeach volleyballWeightliftingWrestlingFreestyle wrestlingGreco-Roman wrestlingAdditions (2020- )BreakingBaseball / SoftballKarateSkateboardingCompetition climbingSurfingSee also: Paralympic sports and Winter Olympic sportsAuthority control databases NationalFranceBnF dataGermanyIsraelUnited StatesJapanCzech RepublicOtherEncyclopedia of Modern UkraineNARARetrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Basketball&oldid=1218459919\""},{"link": "https://en.wikipedia.org//wiki/Basketball_(ball)", "content": "Inflated ball used for basketball gamesA typical basketballA basketball is a spherical ball used in basketball games. Basketballs usually range in size from very small promotional items that are only a few inches (some centimeters) in diameter to extra large balls nearly 2 feet (60\u00a0cm) in diameter used in training exercises. For example, a youth basketball could be 27 inches (69\u00a0cm) in circumference, while a National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) men's ball would be a maximum of 30 inches (76\u00a0cm) and an NCAA women's ball would be a maximum of 29 inches (74\u00a0cm). The standard for a basketball in the National Basketball Association (NBA) is 29.5 inches (75\u00a0cm) in circumference and for the Women's National Basketball Association (WNBA), a maximum circumference of 28.5 inches (72\u00a0cm). High school and junior leagues normally use NCAA, NBA or WNBA sized balls.[1][2]Aside from the court and the baskets, the basketball is the only piece of equipment necessary to play the game of basketball. During the game, the ball must be bounced continuously (dribbling), thrown through the air to other players (passing) or thrown towards the basket (shooting). Therefore, the ball must be very durable and easy to hold on to. The ball is also used to perform tricks (sometimes called freestyling), the most common of which are spinning the ball on the tip of one's index finger, dribbling in complex patterns, rolling the ball over one's shoulder, or performing aerobatic maneuvers with the ball while executing a slam dunk, most notably in the context of a slam dunk contest.Characteristics[edit]Nearly all basketballs have an inflatable inner rubber bladder, generally wrapped in layers of fiber and then covered with a  surface made either from leather (traditional), rubber, or a synthetic composite. As in most inflatable balls, there is a small opening that allows the pressure to be increased or decreased.The surface of the ball is nearly always divided by \"ribs\" that are recessed below the surface of the ball in a variety of configurations and are generally a contrasting color. An orangish surface with black ribs and a possible logo is the traditional color scheme of basketballs but they are sold in various colors.  Most famous of these variations, a red/white/blue basketball, was used for the American Basketball Association, the Harlem Globetrotters, and as the \"money ball\" in the NBA All-Star Weekend's Three Point Contest.Balls are generally designated for indoor (generally made of leather or absorbent composites), or all-surface use (generally made of rubber or durable composites, also known as indoor/outdoor balls). Indoor balls tend to be more expensive than all-surface balls due to the cost of materials. In addition, brand new all-leather indoor balls must be \"broken in\" first to achieve optimal grip before use in competition. The abrasiveness of asphalt and the dirt and moisture present in an outdoor setting will usually ruin an indoor ball within a very short period of time, which is why an indoor/outdoor ball is recommended for recreational players. Outdoor balls are commonly made from rubber to cope with rougher conditions, and they need to be filled with more air to retain a suitable level of air pressure in colder weather.Sizes[edit]Different sizes are used for different age groups.[3][4] The common standards are:SizeTypeCircumferenceWeightNotes on basketball7Men750\u2013770\u00a0mm29.5\u201330.3\u00a0in[4]580\u2013620\u00a0g20\u201322\u00a0oz[4]Men and boys ages 15 and up. This is the official size for men's high school, college, and professional.6Women715\u2013730\u00a0mm28.1\u201328.7\u00a0in[4]510\u2013550\u00a0g18\u201319\u00a0oz[4]Boys ages 12\u201314. Women and girls ages 12 and up. This is the official size for women\u2019s high school, college, and professional.5Youth (North America)[3]Mini (FIBA)[4]685\u2013700\u00a0mm27.0\u201327.6\u00a0in[4]465\u2013495\u00a0g16\u201317\u00a0oz[4]Children ages 9\u201311 years old. This is the standard youth basketball.4Youth (North America)[3]25.5\u00a0in (65\u00a0cm)14\u00a0oz (400\u00a0g)Children ages 5\u20138 years old.3Mini (North America)[3]22.0\u00a0in (56\u00a0cm)10\u00a0oz (280\u00a0g)Children ages 4\u20138 years old. Also known as \u201cmini\u201d basketball.The ball used for all competitions (men's, women's, and mixed) in the formal halfcourt game of 3x3 combines characteristics of the size 6 and size 7 balls. Its circumference is that of a size 6 ball, but its weight is that of a size 7.[5]History[edit]A historic basketball.In early December 1891, the chairman of the physical education department at the School for Christian Workers (Springfield College) in Springfield, Massachusetts, instructed physical education teacher James Naismith to invent a new game to entertain the school's athletes in the winter season. Naismith assembled his class of 18 young men, appointed captains of two nine-player teams, and set in motion the first-ever basketball game, played with a soccer ball and two peach baskets tacked to either end of the gymnasium.The first purpose-built basketballs were made from panels of leather stitched together with a rubber bladder inside. A cloth lining was added to the leather for support and uniformity. A molded version of the early basketball was invented in 1942. For many years, leather was the material of choice for basketball coverings, however, in the late 1990s, synthetic composite materials were put forth and rapidly gained acceptance in most leagues, although the NBA's game balls still use real leather (apart from a brief experiment with a microfiber composite ball in 2006 that was not well received by the players).[6]From 1967 through 1976, the American Basketball Association (ABA) used a distinctive red, white and blue basketball. It is used in the NBA's three point contest.Notable basketball manufacturers[edit]SpaldingSpalding was the first company to produce a basketball for official use. Company founder A. G. Spalding made the first dedicated basketball in the last years of the 19th century at the behest of James Naismith. It has produced basketballs since that time and was the NBA\u2019s official game ball supplier from 1983 to 2021. They also produced the basketballs for the WNBA and NBA G League. The company produces a wide variety of balls for the consumer market.In 2012, it became official provider for both the EuroLeague and EuroCup competitions.[7] It also serves as provider for Liga ACB.Spalding became the supplier for NBL Australia in 2010.[8]MoltenMolten, a Japanese sporting goods manufacturer, has the contract to provide game balls for:[citation needed]All International Basketball Federation (FIBA) world championships and continental qualifying events.All FIBA Asia events.The VTB United League.Many domestic leagues, including Australia, Argentina, Uruguay, France (women), Great Britain, Greece, Indonesia, Italy, Lithuania, the Philippines, Poland, and Portugal.[citation needed]Until the 2006\u201307 season, it provided balls for both Europe-wide competitions organized by Euroleague Basketball, the EuroLeague and ULEB Cup (the EuroCup).[citation needed] Molten's top-of-the line product is the GL7, a leather ball with a distinctive 12-panel design.[9]WilsonWilson Sporting Goods is the official ball supplier of all NCAA postseason tournaments, most notably the men's and women's Division I tournaments, and is used by many NCAA teams during the season as well by many high school leagues. As of 2015, Wilson supplies balls for all FIBA-operated 3x3 competitions.[5] Like Spalding, Wilson produces a variety of balls for the consumer market. It served as the supplier of the NBA's game ball from 1946 to 1983, and again since 2021.RawlingsRawlings has manufactured basketballs since 1902. The company is known for producing a 10-panel ball (the TEN), along with traditional 8-panel balls. The TEN basketball is the official ball of the Amateur Athletic Union and the \"Gus Macker\", the largest 3-on-3 basketball tournament in the United States.[citation needed]NikeNike had the contract to produce balls for the Euroleague Basketball (operators of the EuroLeague and the EuroCup) from 2007[10] until 2012, when it turned to Spalding. In the Philippines the NCAA (unrelated to the American NCAA) and UAAP use the Nike 4005 Official Tournament Balls.NiviaNivia is based in Jalandhar, India and it has been manufacturing basketballs since 1934. It makes hand stitched balls which have been the official balls for many national, international leagues, championship including the All India Football Federation (AIFF).[11]OthersOther companies that make basketballs include Adidas, Baden Sports (official supplier for the Harlem Globetrotters), Dunlop, Tarmak, Mikasa, Mitre, Puma to name a few.See also[edit]List of inflatable manufactured goodsReferences[edit]Wikimedia Commons has media related to Basketball balls.Look up basketball in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.^ Zirm, Jordan (8 September 2016). \"Basketball Sizes: A Quick Guide for All Levels of Play\". STACK. Retrieved 2017-05-05.^ Putman, Carl (September 11, 2017). \"Basketball Official Size & Weight\". LiveStrong.com. Retrieved 2018-02-02.^ a b c d \"Basketball Size Chart - Recommended Sizes for Mom & Me\". www.breakthroughbasketball.com. Retrieved 2017-05-05.^ a b c d e f g h \"Official Basketball Rules 2020 - Basketball Equipment - Valid as of 1st October 2020 (working document)\" (PDF). FIBA. 1 October 2020. p.\u00a012. Retrieved 22 April 2021.^ a b \"Wilson to provide the Official Game Ball for FIBA\" (Press release). Amer Sports. 9 June 2015. Retrieved 17 August 2015.^ Vujcic, Djuka (2006-12-14). \"The New NBA Microfiber Composite Basketball: To Be or Not to Be\". bballcentral.com. Archived from the original on 15 October 2012. Retrieved 2024-02-15.^ Spalding becomes global provider for Euroleague Basketball^ \"Basketball Australia to Play Ball with Spalding Through to 2019\". Basketball Australia. August 10, 2016. Retrieved 2018-02-02.^ \"GL7\". Archived from the original on April 19, 2007.^ \"Euroleague Basketball Announces Partnership with Nike\". Euroleague Basketball. 2007-06-28. Archived from the original on 1 July 2007. Retrieved 2007-07-02.^ \"Nivia Production History\". Archived from the original on 2017-10-23. Retrieved 2020-06-26.vteBasketballGeneral topicsGlossary of termsIndex of articlesLeaguesFIBANBAAAUHistoryJames NaismithProtocol of StockholmVariationsSlamballStreetballOne-on-oneTwenty-oneThree-on-threeSix-on-sixWheelchairRulesJump ballOfficialsTurnoverTrent Tucker RuleViolations3 secondsOffenseDefense5 secondsTime line (8/10 seconds)Basket interferenceCarryingDouble dribbleGoaltendingShot clockTravelingFoulsFlagrantPersonalTechnicalBonusThree-point playFour-point playGame playPositionsSixth manGuardPointShootingComboForwardSmallPowerStretchPointCenterStatisticsPlayer trackingWinning streaksOffensePointField goalThree-pointerReboundAssist50\u201340\u201390 club100-point scorersDefenseBlockStealMovesDribbleCrossoverEuro stepFlopScreenBack screenSlashingShootingFree throwJump shotFadeawayLayupFinger rollSlam dunkPosterizedAlley-oopBackboard shatteringHook shotAir ballBuzzer beaterUncontestedStrategyGeneralPlaybookPracticeShootaroundDrillsMikanTipOffenseBall hogGravityContinuityFlexShuffleUCLA High PostWheelFour cornersPick and rollTriangleMotionPrincetonDribble driveFast breakFlyCherry pickingRun and gunGrinnell SystemNellie BallSmall ballDefenseDouble teamFull-court pressHack-a-ShaqJordan RulesMan-to-manZone1\u20132\u20131\u201311\u20133\u201312\u20133LineMatch-upHybridAmoebaBox-and-oneTriangle-and-twoEquipmentBackboardBallBasketRim (Breakaway rim)CourtGlassHalf courtKeyNetWhistleClothingUniformSleeveFinger sleeveAir JordanChuck Taylor All-StarsMediaList of filmsTrading cards\u00a0Basketball portalOutline of basketballAuthority control databases: National IsraelUnited StatesRetrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Basketball_(ball)&oldid=1219834705\""},{"link": "https://en.wikipedia.org//wiki/Basketball_(disambiguation)", "content": "Look up basketball\u00a0or basketballs in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.Basketball is a sport in which a ball is bounced and thrown through a hoop.Basketball may also refer to:Basketball (ball), the ball used in the sportGaming[edit]Basketball (1974 video game), also known as TV Basketball, a game by TaitoBasketball (1978 video game), a game for the Atari 2600Basketball (1979 video game), an arcade game by Atari, Inc.Basketball (1980 video game), a game for the Intellivision systemTelevision and film[edit]\"Basketball\", an episode of the Indian TV series Dhoom Machaao Dhoom\"Basketball\" (The Office), an episode of the U.S. version of The Office\"Basketball\", an episode of the television series Modern Family\"Basketball\", an episode of the television series TeletubbiesBASEketball, a 1998 comedy American filmMusic[edit]\"Basketball\" (song), a song by Kurtis Blow, notably covered by Lil' Bow WowBasketball, a minor musical side project of Adam Young, Andy Johnson, and Anthony JohnsonOther[edit]\"Basketball\", a successor project to the U.S. government's Total Information Awareness surveillance programBasket-Ball (magazine), a magazine published by the French Federation of BasketballSee also[edit]All pages with titles beginning with BasketballAll pages with titles containing BasketballTopics referred to by the same termThis disambiguation page lists  articles associated with the title Basketball.If an internal link led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article.Retrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Basketball_(disambiguation)&oldid=1221420965\""},{"link": "https://en.wikipedia.org//wiki/Chris_Dudley", "content": "American basketball playerThis article is about the basketball player and politician. For the keyboardist for Underoath, see Christopher Dudley.Chris DudleyDudley in 2013Personal detailsBorn (1965-02-22) February 22, 1965 (age\u00a059)Stamford, Connecticut, U.S.Political partyRepublicanEducationYale University (BA)Basketball careerPersonal informationNationalityAmericanListed height6\u00a0ft 11\u00a0in (2.11\u00a0m)Listed weight235\u00a0lb (107\u00a0kg)Career informationHigh schoolTorrey Pines(San Diego, California)CollegeYale (1983\u20131987)NBA draft1987: 4th  round, 75th overall pickSelected by the Cleveland CavaliersPlaying career1987\u20132003PositionCenterNumber22, 24, 52, 14Career history1987\u20131990Cleveland Cavaliers1990\u20131993New Jersey Nets1993\u20131997Portland Trail Blazers1997\u20132000New York Knicks2000\u20132001Phoenix Suns2001\u20132003Portland Trail BlazersCareer highlights and awardsJ. Walter Kennedy Citizenship Award (1996)3\u00d7 All-Ivy League (1985\u20131987)Career NBA  statisticsPoints3,473 (3.9 ppg)Rebounds5,457 (6.2 rpg)Blocks1,027 (1.2 bpg)Stats\u00a0 at NBA.comStats at Basketball-Reference.comChristen Guilford Dudley (born February 22, 1965) is an American former professional basketball player and politician. He played 886 games across 16 seasons in the NBA for the Cleveland Cavaliers, New Jersey Nets, Portland Trail Blazers, New York Knicks, and Phoenix Suns. A journeyman center, he was known primarily for his defensive skill as a rebounder and shot blocker. In his second season with the Knicks, he played in the 1999 NBA Finals.In 2010, he was the Republican nominee for Governor of Oregon; he lost the election to Democrat John Kitzhaber.Early life and education[edit]Dudley was born in Stamford, Connecticut, the son of Elizabeth Josephine (n\u00e9e Kovacs, c.1941\u2013present), a teacher, and Guilford Dudley III (c. 1932\u2013present), a minister.[1][2][3][4] His maternal grandfather, also a minister, immigrated from Hungary, and his maternal grandmother's parents were also Hungarian.[5] His paternal grandfather was Guilford Dudley, who was U.S. ambassador to Denmark under the Nixon and Ford presidential administrations.[2][6]Dudley played high school basketball at Torrey Pines High School in San Diego, California.[7] He was diagnosed with type 1 diabetes at the age of 16.[8] Like his parents, grandfather, and uncle, Dudley attended Yale University. At Yale he played NCAA basketball for the Bulldogs from 1983 to 1987, was a member of Timothy Dwight College, and earned a degree in political science and economics.[9][10]NBA career[edit]Cleveland Cavaliers (1987\u20131990)[edit]Dudley began playing with the Cleveland Cavaliers during the 1987\u201388 NBA season. During his rookie season, he played in 55 of 82 games, averaging three points per game.[7]New Jersey Nets (1990\u20131993)[edit]Chris Dudley, playing for the New Jersey Nets, squares off with Michael Jordan of the Chicago Bulls on March 28, 1991During the 1989\u20131990 season, he was traded to the New Jersey Nets for a 1991 second-round pick and a 1993 second-round pick. He played three years with the Nets, including the 1990\u201391 season, in which he produced a career-best 7.1 points per game in 61 contests.[7] The 1991\u20131992 season marked the first time he played all 82 games in a season, a feat he would replicate three seasons later with the Blazers. In the 1992\u20131993 season, he was a bench contributor as the Nets went to their second playoff spot in two years.[7]Portland Trail Blazers (1993\u20131997)[edit]During the 1993 offseason, Dudley signed a seven-year, $11-million free agent contract with the Portland Trail Blazers, but he suffered a broken ankle on December 10 in the Blazers' victory over the Los Angeles Lakers, ending his season after just six games.[11] He returned for all 82 games in 1994-95 and missed only three games in the next two seasons.New York Knicks (1997\u20132000)[edit]After playing 161 games for the Blazers between 1995 and 1997, Dudley was traded to the New York Knicks in a three-team deal with the Toronto Raptors, sending John Wallace from New York to Toronto, a 1998 first-round pick from New York to Portland, a 2007 second-round pick from Toronto to Portland and a 2000 first-round pick from Toronto to New York. During his stint with the Knicks, Dudley primarily backed up Patrick Ewing for three seasons.[7] On March 28, 1999, in a game against the Los Angeles Lakers, Shaquille O'Neal made a dunk while guarded by Dudley, whom O'Neal subsequently physically thrust himself upon and shoved to the ground. Dudley responded by angrily throwing the ball at O'Neal. Both men received technical fouls for their actions.[12][13] The next month, on April 16, he grabbed his 5,000th NBA rebound during a game between the Knicks and the Detroit Pistons.[7]In 1999, Dudley reached the NBA Finals for the only time in his career. The 1999 Knicks, the first 8th seeded team in NBA history to reach the Finals, lost to the San Antonio Spurs, four games to one. Dudley's Finals averages were 1.2 points, 3.8 rebounds, 0.6 blocks, and 2.8 fouls across 15.6 minutes per game.[14]Phoenix Suns (2000\u20132001)[edit]After his stint with the Knicks, Dudley was traded to the Phoenix Suns for Luc Longley, participating in 53 games in the 2000\u201301 season. During this season, he averaged 1.4 points, 3.5 rebounds, and 2.1 fouls in 11.6 minutes per game.On July 18, 2001, Dudley, along with superstar point guard Jason Kidd, was traded back to the New Jersey Nets in exchange for Soumaila Samake, Johnny Newman, and Stephon Marbury. He was waived by the Nets the following month.Return to Portland (2001\u20132003)[edit]Dudley returned to the Trail Blazers in 2001 as a free agent. In his first season back, he played 43 games (two starts), with averages of 1.1 points and 1.9 rebounds per game, alongside 40% field goal shooting. Dudley retired after playing 11 total minutes in three games during the 2002\u201303 season.[7]Player profile[edit]In a career total of 886 NBA games, Dudley scored 3473 points (3.9 points per game), had 375 assists (0.4 assists per game), blocked 1027 shots (1.2 blocks per game) and had 5457 rebounds (6.2 rebounds per game).[7]In 1990, Dudley missed 13 consecutive free throws, setting an NBA record.[9][15] In 1989, he set the record for most free throws missed in a single trip to the foul line, missing five consecutive free throws after the opposing team committed three lane violations.[16]NBA Honors[edit]He was the recipient of the NBA's J. Walter Kennedy Citizenship Award in 1996,[6] and USA Today's Most Caring Athlete Award in 1997.[17]Post-NBA[edit]Dudley meeting with President George W. BushIn 1994, he created the Chris Dudley Foundation, an Oregon-based group intended to improve the lives of diabetic children and in the summer of 1996 the Foundation started a basketball camp for children with diabetes. He received an NBA award as well as other community awards for founding the organization. From 2005 to 2007, he was a volunteer assistant coach for the Lake Oswego High School boys' basketball team, where he mentored UCLA-bound star Kevin Love.[18]In early 2006, Dudley became vice president of M Financial Wealth Management.[19] Since October 2008, he has been a wealth management partner with Filigree Advisors.[20]2010 Oregon gubernatorial campaign[edit]Lawn sign in Hillsboro during the primary campaignDudley at the 2010 Dorchester Conference in Seaside, OregonSee also: 2010 Oregon gubernatorial electionIn the summer of 2009, Dudley, a Lake Oswego resident, was encouraged by the Republican Party to consider a run for the U.S. House of Representatives. Dudley declined to run for Congress, preferring to spend more time in the state.[21] On October 11, 2009, The Oregonian reported that Dudley was considering entering the Republican primary for Oregon governor in 2010.[22] In November 2009 he formed a campaign committee and raised roughly $340,000 by early December of the same year.[23] Dudley formally announced his entry into the race on December 16.[24][25] On March 6, 2010, The Oregonian reported Dudley had raised over $1 million, aided by a $50,000 donation from Nike co-founder Phil Knight.[26]In May 2010, Dudley won 39% of the vote in a crowded Republican primary to win the GOP nomination, and prepared to face former governor John Kitzhaber in the November general election.[27] On September 29, 2010, The Register-Guard reported that Chris Dudley's campaign had received $5.6 million, more than twice what was raised by the Kitzhaber campaign. His primary sponsors included the national Republican Governors Association, in-state timber companies, industry trade groups, and Portland area business executives.[28] Nike chairman and co-founder Phil Knight gave Dudley's campaign $400,000.Kitzhaber beat Dudley 49%\u201348%, or just over 22000 votes.[29] While Dudley carried the majority of Oregon's counties, he was unable to overcome a deficit of over 120,000 votes in Multnomah County, the most populous in the state.[30]  Dudley raised and spent a total of $10.3 million, the largest amount ever in an Oregon governor's campaign.[31] Kitzhaber raised and spent $7.4 million.[31] The combined $17.7 million was the most ever spent on an Oregon political race until it was surpassed by the 2018 gubernatorial election.Personal life[edit]Dudley and his wife, also named Chris, have two sons and one daughter.[8] In April 2012, Dudley announced that his family was moving from Lake Oswego, Oregon, to San Diego, California so that his wife could pursue a business opportunity. He also indicated that his political career is likely over.[32] Dudley closed his Oregon campaign committee, which could have been used for future races, in April 2014.[33]During his playing career, Dudley donated $300,000 to a non-profit organization to help pay the cost of college tuition for a class of fourth-graders at Vernon Elementary School in Portland.[2]Two of Dudley's children have been associated with Division I college basketball. His son Charles was on the roster of the 2017\u201318 Bryant Bulldogs, but never played.[34] Dudley's daughter Emma was a reserve forward for the Utah State Aggies from 2018\u20132020. During 29 career games over two seasons, she averaged 0.9 points and 1.4 rebounds across 6.3 minutes per game.[35]Alleged altercation[edit]In October 2018, it was reported that Dudley and current United States Supreme Court Justice Brett Kavanaugh were in a bar fight in September 1985,[36][37][38][39] which involved throwing ice and a drinking glass at a man whose physical appearance was allegedly similar to that of Ali Campbell of UB40.[40][41] Through an article published in The Guardian, Campbell wrote that whomever Dudley and Kavanaugh fought was not him, and that he was not at the bar that night.[40]Career statistics[edit]NBA[edit]Legend\u00a0\u00a0GPGames played\u00a0\u00a0GS\u00a0Games started\u00a0MPG\u00a0Minutes per game\u00a0FG%\u00a0Field goal percentage\u00a03P%\u00a03-point field goal percentage\u00a0FT%\u00a0Free throw percentage\u00a0RPG\u00a0Rebounds per game\u00a0APG\u00a0Assists per game\u00a0SPG\u00a0Steals per game\u00a0BPG\u00a0Blocks per game\u00a0PPG\u00a0Points per game\u00a0Bold\u00a0Career high\u00a0*\u00a0Led the leagueRegular season[edit]YearTeamGPGSMPGFG%3P%FT%RPGAPGSPGBPGPPG1987\u201388Cleveland5519.3.474\u2013.5632.6.4.2.33.11988\u201389Cleveland6128.9.435.000.3642.6.3.1.43.01989\u201390Cleveland372218.5.389\u2013.3385.5.5.51.15.01989\u201390New Jersey27824.9.441\u2013.3058.1.7.81.16.11990\u201391New Jersey612525.6.408\u2013.5348.4.6.62.57.11991\u201392New Jersey822123.2.403\u2013.4689.0.7.52.25.61992\u201393New Jersey711619.7.353\u2013.5187.2.2.21.53.51993\u201394Portland6314.3.240\u2013.5004.0.8.7.52.31994\u201395Portland82*82*27.4.406.000.4649.3.4.51.55.51995\u201396Portland802124.1.453.000.5109.0.5.51.35.11996\u201397Portland811422.7.430\u2013.4747.3.5.51.23.91997\u201398New York512216.8.406\u2013.4465.4.4.31.03.11998\u201399New York461614.9.440\u2013.4754.2.2.3.82.51999\u201300New York4739.8.343\u2013.3332.9.1.1.41.22000\u201301Phoenix533311.6.397\u2013.3893.5.3.3.51.42001\u201302Portland4327.6.400.000.5331.9.3.1.51.12002\u201303Portland303.7.000\u2013\u2013.7.0.0.0.0Career88633118.4.412.000.4586.2.4.41.23.9Playoffs[edit]YearTeamGPGSMPGFG%3P%FT%RPGAPGSPGBPGPPG1988Cleveland406.0.500\u2013.5001.5.5.0.01.31989Cleveland104.0.000\u2013\u2013.0.0.0.0.01992New Jersey4019.3.357\u2013.5006.5.8.52.53.51994Portland4220.3.400\u2013.5003.8.01.5.02.31995Portland3319.7.667\u2013.3755.0.3.0.32.31996Portland5018.4.385\u2013.6675.4.2.4.42.81997Portland4017.3.455\u2013.3337.0.8.51.33.01998New York638.8.333\u2013.5003.0.0.2.31.31999New York18616.3.421\u2013.3934.6.3.5.42.42000New York528.6.500\u20131.0002.4.4.2.2.82001Phoenix308.7.500\u2013\u20132.3.0.3.3.72002Portland201.5.000\u2013\u2013.5.0.0.0.0Career591618.4.407\u2013.4554.0.3.4.52.0College[edit]YearTeamGPGSMPGFG%3P%FT%RPGAPGSPGBPGPPG1983\u201384Yale261930.2.464.4675.1.4.3.74.71984\u201385Yale262630.6.446.53310.2.8.72.012.61985\u201386Yale262629.1.539.4829.81.0.31.416.21986\u201387Yale242431.2.569\u2013.54213.3.6.62.817.6Career[42]1029527.4.513\u2013.5129.5.7.51.712.6Electoral history[edit]Main article: 2010 Oregon gubernatorial election2010 Oregon Republican gubernatorial primary[43]PartyCandidateVotes%RepublicanChris Dudley 122,855 39.11 RepublicanAllen Alley99,75331.76RepublicanJohn Lim47,33915.07RepublicanBill Sizemore23,5227.49RepublicanWilliam Ames Curtright12,4973.98RepublicanRex O. Watkins3,0600.97RepublicanWrite-ins2,0010.64RepublicanClark Colvin1,2060.38RepublicanDarren Karr1,1270.36RepublicanBob Forthan7270.23Total votes314,087 100.00 2010 Oregon gubernatorial election[44]PartyCandidateVotes%\u00b1%DemocraticJohn Kitzhaber 716,525 49.29% -1.43% RepublicanChris Dudley694,28747.76%+5.01%ConstitutionGreg Kord20,4751.41%-2.23%LibertarianWes Wagner19,0481.31%+0.09%Write-ins3,2130.22%Majority22,2381.53%-6.45%Turnout1,453,548Democratic holdSwingReferences[edit]^ \"Chris Dudley ancestry\". Archived from the original on November 16, 2017. Retrieved September 23, 2010.^ a b c Oregon Republicans like what Chris Dudley brings to governor's race^ CHRIS DUDLEY IS NOT CHIP OFF THE OLD BLOCK^ Elizabeth Kovacs Will Be Married To a Clergyman; Yale Divinity Student Engaged to the Rev. Guilford Dudley 3d Sandin--Drews^ \"Chris Dudley ancestry\". Archived from the original on November 16, 2017. Retrieved September 23, 2010.^ a b Markowitz, Dan (January 25, 1998). \"Knick player reaches for more time on court\". The New York Times. New York City. Retrieved February 22, 2010.^ a b c d e f g h \"Chris Dudley NBA Statistics\". Basketball Reference. Retrieved June 2, 2010.^ a b \"About Chris Dudley\". ChrisDudley.com. Archived from the original on January 31, 2010. Retrieved February 22, 2010.^ a b \"Chris Dudley bio\". NBA.com. Retrieved December 28, 2009.^ \"Former Bulldog Dudley '87 wins Rep. gov. primary in Oregon\". Yale Daily News. May 22, 2010. Retrieved December 13, 2020.^ Howard-Cooper, Scott (December 10, 1993). \"Trail Blazers Lose Dudley\". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved January 11, 2024.^ Smith, Corbin (September 26, 2018). \"Brett Kavanaugh's Latest Defender: The Eminently Useless Chris Dudley\". Vice. Retrieved April 1, 2020.^ Astramskas, David (March 28, 2017). \"Remembering The Most Disrespectful Dunk Ever: Shaq's Revenge Dunk & Push on Chris Dudley\". ballislife.com. Retrieved April 1, 2020.^ \"Chris Dudley 1998-99 Game Log\". Basketball Reference. Retrieved April 1, 2020.^ \"Indiana Pacers at New Jersey Nets, April 14, 1990\". BasketballReference.com. Retrieved July 29, 2010.^ \"This Day in Sports: Chris Dudley's Trip To The Line Goes Horribly Wrong\". ESPN.com. January 29, 2010. Retrieved July 29, 2010.^ \"Chris Dudley\". nba.com/blazers. Archived from the original on November 19, 2010. Retrieved April 1, 2020.^ Konecky, Chad (April 12, 2007). \"RISE presents Gatorade National Boys' Basketball Player of the Year, Kevin Love\". RiseMag.com. Retrieved June 30, 2007.^ Eggers, Kerry (March 21, 2006). \"Dudley's right on the money\". Portland Tribune. Archived from the original on September 29, 2007. Retrieved June 30, 2007.^ Chris Dudley profile Archived December 14, 2009, at the Wayback Machine^ Epstein, Ethan. \"Dudley Do-Right.\" The Weekly Standard. Web. June 30, 2010. <http://www.weeklystandard.com/articles/dudley-do-right>.^ Mapes, Jeff (October 11, 2009). \"Former Blazers star looking at governor's race\". The Oregonian. Retrieved October 13, 2009.^ Mapes, Jeff (December 3, 2009). \"Dudley has impressive cash haul to start campaign\". The Oregonian. Retrieved December 4, 2009.^ \"Dudley jumps into Oregon governor's race\". Lake Oswego Review. December 16, 2009. Archived from the original on September 22, 2010. Retrieved December 16, 2009.^ \"Dudley for Governor\". Archived from the original on December 16, 2009. Retrieved December 16, 2009.^ Mapes, Jeff (March 6, 2010). \"Former Blazer Chris Dudley seeks to outpoint Republican rivals at state GOP conference\". The Oregonian. Retrieved March 7, 2010.^ \"Oregon 2010 Primary Results: Governor\". The Oregonian. May 18, 2010. Archived from the original on May 23, 2010. Retrieved May 19, 2010.^ \"Dudley doubles donor dollars\". projects.registerguard.com. Retrieved November 7, 2017.^ Steves, David (November 3, 2010). \"Democrat Kitzhaber wins unprecedented third term as Oregon governor\". The Register-Guard. Retrieved November 4, 2010.^ \"Our Campaigns - OR Governor Race - Nov 02, 2010\".^ a b \"Oregon Secretary Of State\". secure.sos.state.or.us. Retrieved November 7, 2017.^ Mapes, Jeff (April 7, 2012). \"Chris Dudley, ending his political aspirations, says move to San Diego makes sense for his family\". The Oregonian. Retrieved April 27, 2012.^ \"Oregon Secretary Of State\". secure.sos.state.or.us. Retrieved November 7, 2017.^ \"Charles Dudley\". Bryantbulldogs.com. Retrieved April 3, 2020.^ \"2019-20 Women's Basketball Roster: Emma Dudley\". utahstateaggies.com. Retrieved April 3, 2020.^ Bazelon, Emily; Protess, Ben (October 1, 2018). \"Kavanaugh Was Questioned by Police After Bar Fight in 1985\". The New York Times. New York City. Retrieved October 6, 2018.^ Cross, Ian (October 2, 2018). \"Former Cav was allegedly in bar fight in 1985 with Supreme Court nominee Kavanaugh\". WEWS-TV. Cleveland: E. W. Scripps Company. Retrieved October 6, 2018.^ Mathis-Lilley, Ben (October 2, 2018). \"Friend Who Said Kavanaugh Wasn't Aggressive When Drunk Was Arrested in Bar Fight Kavanaugh Allegedly Started\". Slate. United States: The Slate Group. Retrieved October 6, 2018.^ Feldman, Dan (October 1, 2018). \"Former NBA player Chris Dudley alleged to have partnered with Brett Kavanaugh in bar fight\". Yahoo! News. United States: Oath Inc. NBC Sports. Retrieved October 6, 2018.^ a b \"Ali Campbell on UB40, Brett Kavanaugh and an ugly bar brawl\". The Guardian. Kings Place, London. October 2, 2018. Retrieved October 6, 2018.^ Jaquiss, Nigel (October 1, 2018). \"Police Responded to 1985 Bar Fight Involving Brett Kavanaugh and Former Blazer Chris Dudley, New York Times Reports\". Willamette Week. Portland, Oregon: City of Roses Newspapers. Retrieved October 6, 2018.^ \"Chris Dudley\". Sports Reference. Retrieved April 4, 2020.^ \"Official Results: May 18, 2010 Primary Election\". records.sos.state.or.us. Retrieved April 2, 2020.^ \"Official Results: November 2, 2010 General Election\". records.sos.state.or.us. Retrieved April 2, 2020.External links[edit]Chris Dudley FoundationBiography at NBA.comChris Dudley for Governor official campaign site (Archived)Party political officesPreceded\u00a0byRon Saxton Republican nominee for Governor of Oregon 2010Succeeded\u00a0byDennis RichardsonvteJ. Walter Kennedy Citizenship Award1975: Unseld1976: Watts1977: Bing1978: Lanier1979: Murphy1980: Carr1981: Glenn1982: Benson1983: Erving1984: Layden1985: Issel1986: Cooper & Sparrow1987: Thomas1988: English1989: Bailey1990: Rivers1991: K. Johnson1992: M. Johnson1993: Porter1994: Dumars1995: O'Toole1996: Dudley1997: Brown1998: Smith1999: Grant2000: Divac2001: Mutombo2002: Mourning2003: Robinson2004: Miller2005: Snow2006: Garnett2007: Nash2008: Billups2009: Mutombo2010: Dalembert2011: Artest2012: Gasol2013: Faried2014: Deng2015: Noah2016: Ellington2017: James2018: Barea2019: Lillard2020: Brogdon2023: CurryRetrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chris_Dudley&oldid=1219989843\""},{"link": "https://en.wikipedia.org//wiki/Brooklyn_Nets", "content": "National Basketball Association team in New York City\"New Jersey Americans\" redirects here. For the soccer club, see New Jersey Americans (soccer).Brooklyn Nets 2023\u201324 Brooklyn Nets seasonConferenceEasternDivisionAtlanticFounded1967HistoryNew Jersey Americans1967\u20131968 (ABA)New York Nets1968\u20131976 (ABA)1976\u20131977 (NBA)New Jersey Nets1977\u20132012Brooklyn Nets2012\u2013present[1][2]ArenaBarclays CenterLocationBrooklyn, New YorkTeam colorsBlack, white[3][4][5]\u00a0 \u00a0Main sponsorWebull[6]CEOSam Zussman[7][8]General managerSean MarksHead coachJordi Fern\u00e1ndezOwnershipJoseph Tsai[9][10]Affiliation(s)Long Island NetsChampionships2ABA: 2 (1974, 1976)NBA: 0Conference titles2 (2002, 2003)Division titles5ABA: 1 (1974)NBA: 4 (2002, 2003, 2004, 2006)Retired numbers6 (3, 5, 23, 25, 32, 52)Websitewww.nba.com/netsAssociationIconStatementThe Brooklyn Nets are an American professional basketball team based in the New York City borough of Brooklyn. The Nets compete in the National Basketball Association (NBA) as a member of the Atlantic Division of the Eastern Conference. The team plays its home games at Barclays Center. They are one of two NBA teams located in New York City; the other is the New York Knicks. The club was established in 1967 as a charter franchise of the NBA's rival league, the American Basketball Association (ABA). They played in New Jersey as the New Jersey Americans during their first season, before relocating to Long Island, New York, in 1968 and changing their name to the New York Nets. During this time, the Nets won two ABA championships (in 1974 and 1976). In 1976, the ABA merged with the NBA, and the Nets were absorbed into the NBA along with three other ABA teams (the San Antonio Spurs, Indiana Pacers, and Denver Nuggets), all of whom remain in the league to this day.In 1977, the team returned to New Jersey and played as the New Jersey Nets from 1977 to 2012. Led by star point guard Jason Kidd, the Nets reached the NBA Finals in two consecutive NBA seasons (2001\u201302 and 2002\u201303), but failed to win a championship.[11] In the summer of 2012, the team moved to Barclays Center in Brooklyn,[12] becoming the first major sports franchise in the borough since the departure of the Brooklyn Dodgers baseball team in 1957.[13] Since moving to Brooklyn, the Nets have qualified for the playoffs on eight occasions, including trips to the Conference Semifinals in 2014 and 2021.History[edit]Main article: History of the Brooklyn NetsThe Brooklyn Nets were founded in 1967 and initially played in Teaneck, New Jersey, as the New Jersey Americans. In its early years, the team led a nomadic existence, moving to Long Island in 1968 and playing in various arenas there as the New York Nets.[14]Led by Hall of Famer Julius \"Dr. J\" Erving, the Nets won two ABA championships in New York before becoming one of four ABA teams to be admitted into the NBA as part of the ABA\u2013NBA merger in 1976. Unlike the other three ABA teams entering the NBA, who played in cities without any NBA presence, the Nets were required by the NBA to pay an \"encroachment fee\" of $4.8\u00a0million (equivalent to $26\u00a0million in 2023) to the New York Knicks.[15] The team financed that payment by selling Erving's contract to the Philadelphia 76ers;[16] and the Nets went from winning the last ABA title in 1975\u201376 to having the worst record in the NBA in 1976\u201377. The team then moved back to New Jersey in 1977 and became the New Jersey Nets.[17][18] During their time in the state, the Nets played in two consecutive NBA Finals in the 2001\u201302 and 2002\u201303 seasons, led on the court by point guard Jason Kidd.After playing 35 seasons in New Jersey, the team moved back to the state of New York, changed its geographic name to Brooklyn, and began playing in the new Barclays Center, starting with the 2012\u201313 NBA season.[12][19] The team's move from New Jersey to Brooklyn was approved unanimously by the NBA Board of Governors on April 13, 2012.[20]Rivalries[edit]Boston Celtics[edit]During the early 2000s, the Nets were led by Jason Kidd and Kenyon Martin, while the Boston Celtics were experiencing newfound success behind Paul Pierce and Antoine Walker. The rivalry began to heat up in the 2002 Eastern Conference Finals, which was preceded by trash talking from the Celtics,[21] who claimed Martin was a \"fake\" tough guy. Things progressed as the series started, and on-court tensions seemed to spill into the stands. Celtic fans berated Kidd and his family with chants of \"Wife Beater!\"[22] in response to Kidd's 2001 domestic abuse charge. When the series returned to New Jersey, Nets fans responded, with some brandishing signs that read \"Will someone please stab Paul Pierce?\"[23] referring to a night club incident in 2000 in which Pierce was stabbed 11 times. When asked about the fan barbs being traded, Kenyon Martin stated, \"Our fans hate them, their fans hate us.\" Bill Walton said at the time that Nets-Celtics was the \"beginning of the next great NBA rivalry\" during the Eastern Conference Finals in 2002. Led by Kidd, the Nets advanced to the NBA Finals, and the following year, swept Boston in the 2003 playoffs.On November 28, 2012, there were indications that the rivalry might be rekindled when an altercation occurred on the court, resulting in the ejection of Rajon Rondo, Gerald Wallace, and Kris Humphries. Rondo was suspended for two games in the aftermath, while Wallace and Kevin Garnett were fined.[24] The story was revisited on December 25, when Wallace grabbed Garnett's shorts and the two had to be broken up by referees and players alike.In the 2019 NBA off-season, the Nets signed point guard Kyrie Irving. Coming off two seasons with the Celtics, Irving was described as selfish by many critics. This impression caused many Celtics fans to blame him for the Celtics' inability to get through to the playoffs.During a regular season game in the 2019\u201320 season between the Celtics and Nets, the Celtics' fans displayed their displeasure with Irving by chanting \"Kyrie sucks\" in TD Garden.[25] When the series returned to Brooklyn two days later, the Nets' fans chanted \"Kyrie's better\" in response to the chants in Boston.[26] The \"Kyrie's Better\" chants reference to how the Celtics signed Kemba Walker after Irving left for the Nets.On May 30, 2021, a fan threw a water bottle at Irving at TD Garden following a Nets victory and a 3\u20131 lead in the series.[27]New York Knicks[edit]Main article: Knicks\u2013Nets rivalryThe Knicks\u2013Nets rivalry has historically been a geographical one, with the Knicks playing in Madison Square Garden in the New York City borough of Manhattan, while the Nets played in the suburban area of Long Island and in New Jersey, and since 2012 have been playing at Barclays Center in Brooklyn. Media outlets have noted the Knicks\u2013Nets rivalry's similarity to those of other New York City teams, such as the Major League Baseball (MLB) Subway Series rivalry between the American League (AL)'s New York Yankees and the National League (NL)'s New York Mets, and the National Football League (NFL) rivalry between the National Football Conference (NFC)'s New York Giants and the American Football Conference (AFC)'s New York Jets, the result of the boroughs' proximity through the New York City subway. Historically, the boroughs of Manhattan and Brooklyn competed via the Dodgers\u2013Giants rivalry, when the two teams were the Brooklyn Dodgers and the New York Giants. Like the Knicks and Nets, the Giants and Dodgers played in Manhattan and Brooklyn, respectively, and were fierce intraleague rivals.[28] The rivalry between the New York Islanders and New York Rangers of the National Hockey League took on a similar dimension while the Islanders inhabited the Barclays Center, from 2015 to 2021.[29] Due to the Knicks being located in Manhattan and the Nets being located in Brooklyn, some media outlets have dubbed this rivalry \"Clash of the Boroughs\".[30][31]Toronto Raptors[edit]Main article: Nets\u2013Raptors rivalryThe rivalry with the Toronto Raptors began in the 2000s, specifically in 2004, after Raptors guard/forward Vince Carter was traded to the New Jersey Nets.[32][33] However, the two teams did not meet in the playoffs until 2007, when the Nets defeated the Raptors in the first round series, 4 games to 2, after a go-ahead shot by Richard Jefferson with 8 seconds left in Game 6 led to a 98\u201397 victory.[34] Seven years later, the teams met again in the first round, and the series went to seven games, with a game-winning block by Paul Pierce, giving the Nets the 104\u2013103 victory.[35] The series was noted for controversy when Toronto Raptors general manager Masai Ujiri made derogatory remarks towards Brooklyn at a fan rally outside Maple Leaf Square in Toronto before Game 1. Ujiri later apologized at halftime.[36] The Raptors and Nets faced each other in the 2020 NBA playoffs in the first round, with Toronto winning the series four games to none.[37]Season-by-season record[edit]List of the last five seasons completed by the Nets. For the full season-by-season history, see List of Brooklyn Nets seasons.Note: GP = Games played, W = Wins, L = Losses, W\u2013L% = Winning percentageSeasonGPWLW\u2013L%FinishPlayoffs2019\u201320723537.4864th, AtlanticLost in first round, 0\u20134 (Raptors)2020\u201321724824.6672nd, AtlanticLost in conference semifinals, 3\u20134 (Bucks)2021\u201322824438.5374th, AtlanticLost in first round, 0\u20134 (Celtics)2022\u201323824537.5494th, AtlanticLost in first round, 0\u20134 (76ers)2023\u201324823250.3904th, AtlanticDid not qualifyUniforms[edit]New Jersey Americans[edit]Upon debuting in the ABA in 1967, the New Jersey Americans wore white and red uniforms. The white uniforms contained red, blue and white stripes, with the team name and numerals in red with blue trim. The red uniforms mirror the striping configurations of the white uniforms while the city name and numerals were in blue with white trim.[38]New York Nets[edit]1968\u20131972[edit]Moving to Long Island as the New York Nets, they kept the original Americans template except for the location and team name. The white uniforms featured a script \"Nets\" lettering with a tail accent below, while the red uniforms featured \"New York\" in block letters (similar to the New York Knicks). Over the years, the letters and stripes would endure a few adjustments.[38]1972\u20131977[edit]The Nets changed uniforms upon moving to Nassau Coliseum. The white uniforms featured a thick blue stripe with white stars on the left, along with a red stripe and white outline. The team name is written in red block letters. The blue uniforms, which featured \"New York\" in white block letters, mirrored that of the white uniforms.[38]New Jersey Nets[edit]1977\u20131981; 1983\u20131990[edit]The Nets carried the \"Stars and Stripes\" uniform to New Jersey in 1977. The white uniform remained the same but the blue uniform read \"Nets\" in front. The blue uniform later added \"New Jersey\" in white block letters inside the red stripe.[38]1981\u20131983[edit]Upon moving to the Meadowlands in 1981, the Nets briefly changed their uniform set. The white uniform brought back the \"Nets\" script from the original New York Nets uniforms, but the color scheme became blue with red trim. The blue uniform featured \"New Jersey\" stacked together in a similar script style, and the letters were colored in red with white trim.[38]1990\u20131997[edit]The Nets underwent a visual rebrand before the 1990\u201391 season. The white uniform featured a more futuristic \"Nets\" script in red with white and blue trim, while adding red and blue stripes. Initially, the Nets wore white and light blue gradient road uniforms that had a tie-dye effect, but switched to a solid blue uniform after only one season. Both blue uniforms featured the same \"Nets\" script in red with blue and white trim along with red and white stripes.[38]1997\u20132012[edit]The Nets updated their visual identity prior to the 1997\u201398 season, going with a deeper red and navy scheme with silver accents. The white uniform, which remained virtually unchanged throughout its history, featured the team name in navy with silver and red trim. The navy uniform featured the city name in silver with navy and red trim. The dark grey alternate uniform, used until 2006, initially went with the city name in navy with white and red trim, but reversed the color scheme to white with red and navy trim after only two seasons. This uniform was the only one to feature the \"NJ\" alternate logo on the neckline. The red alternate uniform, which replaced the grey alternate and became the primary dark uniform in 2009, featured the team name in white with navy and silver trim. All uniforms featured thick navy and silver argyle stripes.[38]Brooklyn Nets[edit]2012\u20132017[edit]Upon moving to Brooklyn in 2012, the Nets went with a simple black and white uniform design, with \"Brooklyn\" in front of both the white and black uniforms. They also wore three different alternate uniforms. A grey-sleeved alternate with \"Brooklyn\" in Dodger blue, was first used in 2013 as a visual recall to the Brooklyn Dodgers. A white-sleeved alternate with the team name in black, featured the same \"Stars and Stripes\" look from the 1970s. A dark grey sleeveless alternate, meant to recall the 1980s New Jersey Nets uniforms, featured the team name in white and the city name in white written inside a black stripe.[38]2017\u2013present[edit]With the switch from Adidas to Nike, the Nets kept most aspects of their visual identity intact. The white uniform became the \"Association\" uniform while the black uniform became the \"Icon\" uniform. The Nets have had three different versions of the \"Statement\" uniform. The first set, with \"BKLYN\" in white, was in dark grey and featured the same stars and stripes look from the 1970s. The uniform was updated in 2019 to a lighter grey base and black/dark grey stripes, with \"BKLYN\" written in graffiti style designed by Eric Haze. In 2022, the Nets again changed its \"Statement\" uniform, this time with a black base, black letters with silver trim, and a subtle greyscale herringbone striping with three black stars on the left.[38]The Nets also employed a fourth uniform option: the \"City\" uniform. The 2017\u201318 black \"City\" uniform featured the full team name spelled in white along with grey accents inspired from the Brooklyn Bridge. The following season, it was replaced with a black uniform featuring stylized Brooklyn camo patterns as a tribute to The Notorious B.I.G. For 2019\u201320, the Nets wore white versions of the \"Biggie\" uniforms, but with Haze-designed \"BED-STUY\" graffiti lettering in front (a reference to Bedford\u2013Stuyvesant where The Notorious B.I.G. grew up). The 2020\u201321 \"City\" uniform, which honors Brooklyn-born artist Jean-Michel Basquiat, is predominantly black and features \"BKLYN NETS\" written in Basquiat's style along with multi-colored striping.[38] The Basquiat-inspired \"City\" uniform returned in 2022\u201323 but in a white base.[39]In the 2021\u201322 season, the Nets' \"City\" uniform featured visual references to the Nets' uniform history. The navy base and white and silver argyle stripes recalled the 1997\u20132009 uniforms. The \"Nets\" wordmark and lettering were taken from the 1990\u201397 uniforms. A red stripe with white stars honored the \"Stars and Stripes\" uniform of the 1970s and 1980s. A modified version of the 1980s New Jersey Nets logo, replacing the New Jersey outline with the map of Brooklyn, was added to the right leg. The 1997\u20132012 shield logo, also tweaked to feature the current \"B\" alternate logo, was added on the waist.[40]The \"City\" uniform for the 2023\u201324 season featured a collaboration with Brooklyn-based artist Kaws. The predominantly dark grey design featured splashes of light grey, blue, turquoise and pink inspired by Kaws' \"Tension\" series. The stylized \"Nets\" wordmark was also influenced by Kaws' graphic style.[41]A fifth uniform option, the \"Earned\" uniform, is released occasionally and is exclusive only to the teams who qualified in the NBA playoffs the previous year. The Nets, by virtue of qualifying in the 2020 NBA playoffs, were given an \"Earned\" uniform. The design featured the herringbone parquet style of the Barclays Center court in shades of black and grey, with Helvetica lettering inspired from the signs found at the New York City Subway.[38]Culture[edit]Mascot[edit]Cover to BrooklyKnight #1, distributed at the Brooklyn Nets home opener. Art by Mike Deodato.The mascot of the New Jersey Nets was Sly the Silver Fox, who debuted on October 31, 1997, as part of the rebranding of the Nets for the 1997\u201398 season.[42] Prior to that, the Nets' mascot was an anthropomorphic dragon named Duncan the Dragon.[43]After the Nets' move to Brooklyn, the team introduced a new superhero mascot named BrooklyKnight (a pun on the demonym \"Brooklynite\") on November 3, 2012. In his first appearance, he was lowered from the ceiling of Barclays Center amid sparks and fanfare and introduced by Nets public address announcer David Diamante: \"Here to defend Brooklyn, he's the BrooklyKnight.\" The mascot was co-created by Marvel Entertainment, a sister company to NBA broadcasters ABC and ESPN. The character also starred in a 32-page comic book published by Marvel titled BrooklyKnight #1, written by Jason Aaron with art from Mike Deodato.[44][45] After the Nets' second season in Brooklyn, the BrooklyKnight mascot was retired, leaving the Nets mascotless.[46]Team anthem[edit]On November 3, 2012, the Nets introduced a new team anthem titled \"Brooklyn: Something To Lean On\", written and recorded by Brooklyn-born musician John Fort\u00e9.[47] The song is notable for its refrain, which features the \"Brooklyn\" chant that has been popular with fans in the Barclays Center.[48]Brooklyn Brigade[edit]The Brooklyn Brigade[49] is a group of fans who are known for their loud chants and passionate attitude towards the Nets. The group was founded in November 2012 by Nets fan and Brooklyn native Udong \"Bobby\" Edemeka.[50] Edemeka attended a few early season games of the team in their new Brooklyn home. Edemeka noticed that the team lacked a solid fan base in their new home, and decided to purchase tickets for a small group of roughly 20 fans who he noticed were regular followers of the team on the SB Nation online blog, NetsDaily.[51]The Brigade was not yet based in Section 114.[52] Instead, Edemeka would purchase tickets in whichever section he could, which often included nosebleed seats. The Brigade initially did not get much recognition from the Nets. Edemeka met with the CEO Irina Pavlova (of the ONEXIM Group), who was fond of the group's antics.[53] Although Pavlova was a supporter of the group, other members of the organization were resistant to showing support for the Brigade. During the 2014\u201315 season, however, the Brooklyn Nets organization began assigning seats to the Brigade in Section 114 of the Barclays Center. This section is adjacent to the press booth and gave the Brooklyn Brigade exposure on a regional level and then eventually on a national level.During the Eastern Conference semi-finals in 2014, while the Nets battled the Miami Heat, Brooklyn Nets and Barclays Center CEO Brett Yomark noticed the Brigade's effect on the arena, and he started to visit Section 114 distributing Nets' apparel. In 2016, the Nets hired Sean Marks as their general manager, who became an immediate supporter of the group.[54] During the 2018\u201319 season, the Nets reserved section 114 for passionate fans, and called it \"The BK Block.\"[55] Although the Brigade is an independent fan group of the Nets, The Block[56] comprises mostly Brigade members.[57]Mr. Whammy[edit]Bruce Reznick, known commonly as \"Mr. Whammy\", is an iconic 86-year-old Nets superfan. Reznick became a Nets season ticket holder in 1998 when the Nets played in Continental Airlines Arena. He is known for his signature \"whammy\", a practice in which he stands on the sidelines in view of opposing players while they are attempting free throws and tries to distract them with pointing, jumping, and yelling. Reznick will not \"whammy\" players that have previously played for the Nets. Reznick believes the practice is effective as Barclays Center often has one of the lowest opposing team free throw percentages in the league. For example, by January 11, 2023, opposing teams had only a 70.3 free throw shot percentage in Brooklyn, which was about eight points lower than league average for the 2022\u201323 NBA season. Before Reznick was given the name \"Mr. Whammy\" by Nets broadcaster Ian Eagle he was referred to as \"Red Shirt\".[58][59]Management[edit]On September 18, 2019, Joseph Tsai, the executive vice chairman of the Alibaba Group, completed the acquisition of full ownership of the Brooklyn Nets. With the closing of the transaction, Tsai became NBA Governor of the Nets and its affiliates.[60] Additionally, former Turner Broadcasting president David Levy was named CEO of the Nets and Barclays Center.[61][62] On November 12, the Nets and Barclays Center announced that David Levy would step down from the CEO position he had assumed less than two months before. Oliver Weisberg, president of Tsai's holding company J Tsai Sports, assumed an interim CEO role.[63][64]Ownership history[edit]The original owner of the Nets franchise was trucking magnate Arthur J. Brown, who founded the team in 1967. The next year, Brown sold the team for $1.1 million to entrepreneur Roy Boe.[65] Due to financial losses suffered while the team was on Long Island, Boe moved the team back to New Jersey in 1977 and sold the team a year later to a group of seven local businessmen led by Alan N. Cohen and Joseph Taub, who became known as the \"Secaucus Seven\".[66]After a lengthy ownership of the franchise and numerous unsuccessful attempts to improve the financial situation of the team, the \"Secaucus Seven\" finally sold the team in 1998 to a group of local real estate developers led by Raymond Chambers and Lewis Katz,[67] who called themselves the \"Community Youth Organization\" and wanted to move the team to Newark, New Jersey. The next year the group signed an agreement with New York Yankees owner George Steinbrenner to form YankeeNets, a holding company that owned the two teams, and later also the New Jersey Devils, and increase leverage in future broadcast contracts by negotiating together. After receiving offers from several broadcast partners, including Cablevision, which held their rights at that time, YankeeNets decided to launch its own regional sports television called the YES Network.YankeeNets failed in its attempts to secure a deal with Newark to construct a new arena in the city. By that point in time, tensions between the management of the Yankees, Nets, and the Devils had cause a rift between them, and a decision was made to split the group.[68] With their plan to move the Nets dead, the Community Youth Organization placed the team up for sale. After a short bidding process, the group secured a deal in 2004 with real estate developer Bruce Ratner to buy the team for $300 million, defeating a similar offer by Charles Kushner and Senator Jon Corzine of New Jersey. Ratner had purchased the team with the intent of moving it to a new arena in Brooklyn, which was to be a centerpiece of the large-scale Atlantic Yards development.[69]Rapper Jay-Z owned a small minority stake in the Nets from 2003 until 2013. Jay-Z was a leader in the marketing for the team and helped encourage their move from New Jersey to the Barclays Center in Brooklyn, in which he also held a stake. He relinquished his stake after registering as a sports agent with his new agency Roc Nation Sports, to avert any potential conflicts of interest.[70][71] His shares were eventually sold to singer, rapper, actor and entrepreneur Will Pan, making Pan the first American of Taiwanese descent to own a U.S. professional sports franchise.[72]On September 24, 2009, Mikhail Prokhorov, Russia's third-richest man according to Forbes, confirmed his intention to become majority owner of the Nets. Prokhorov sent an offer to the team owners requesting that the controlling shares of the basketball club be sold to his company, Onexim, for a symbolic price. In return, Prokhorov funded a loan of $700 million for the construction of Barclays Center, and attracted additional funds from Western banks. Prokhorov stated that he initiated the deal to help push Russian basketball to a new level of development.[73] On May 11, 2010, following approval from the other owners of NBA teams, Prokhorov had become the principal owner of the Nets.[74]In late 2017, Prokhorov agreed to sell a 49% stake in the team to Joseph Tsai, with an option for Tsai to become the majority owner.[75] The option was exercised in August 2019, with Tsai also buying the Nets' arena, Barclays Center, from Prokhorov for nearly $1 billion in a separate deal. The NBA Board of Governors unanimously approved the sale to Tsai on September 18, 2019.[76]Facilities[edit]Barclays Center in 2019Home arenas[edit]Source:[77]ArenaLocationDurationTeaneck ArmoryTeaneck, New Jersey1967\u20131968Long Island ArenaCommack, New York1968\u20131969Island GardenWest Hempstead, New York1969\u20131972Nassau Veterans Memorial ColiseumUniondale, New York1972\u20131977Rutgers Athletic CenterPiscataway, New Jersey1977\u20131981Brendan Byrne Arena (1981\u20131996)renamed Continental Airlines Arena (1996\u20132007)renamed Izod Center (2007\u20132010)East Rutherford, New Jersey1981\u20132010Prudential CenterNewark, New Jersey2010\u20132012Barclays CenterBrooklyn, New York2012\u2013presentPractice facilities[edit]The Nets' practice facility and headquarters for the team's basketball operations are located at the Hospital for Special Surgery Training Center in the Industry City complex in the Sunset Park neighborhood of Brooklyn. The facility opened on February 17, 2016, and is built on the roof of an empty warehouse in the complex, occupying 70,000 square feet of space in total. The renovation project cost roughly $50 million.[78] The opening of the training center completed the Nets' move to Brooklyn.The team's previous practice facility was at the 65,000-square-foot PNY Center in East Rutherford, New Jersey, which opened in 1998.[79] Prior to that, the team practiced at the APA Recreation Center in North Bergen, New Jersey, sharing their lockers and practice courts with truck drivers who used the facility, and at Ramapo College in Mahwah, New Jersey.[79]In the aftermath of Hurricane Sandy in November 2012, PNY Center suffered a power outage and extensive water damage due to flooding, and for several months, the team used the smaller training spaces and practice courts inside the Barclays Center instead.[80]Personnel[edit]Main articles: Brooklyn Nets all-time roster and List of Brooklyn Nets head coachesCurrent roster[edit]Brooklyn Nets rostervtePlayersCoachesPos.No.NameHeightWeightDOBFromF13Bates-Diop, Keita\u00a06\u00a0ft 8\u00a0in (2.03\u00a0m)229\u00a0lb (104\u00a0kg)1996-01-23Ohio StateG/F1Bridges, Mikal6\u00a0ft 6\u00a0in (1.98\u00a0m)209\u00a0lb (95\u00a0kg)1996-08-30VillanovaF/C33Claxton, Nic6\u00a0ft 11\u00a0in (2.11\u00a0m)215\u00a0lb (98\u00a0kg)1999-04-17GeorgiaF21Clowney, Noah6\u00a0ft 10\u00a0in (2.08\u00a0m)210\u00a0lb (95\u00a0kg)2004-07-14AlabamaF28Finney-Smith, Dorian\u00a06\u00a0ft 7\u00a0in (2.01\u00a0m)220\u00a0lb (100\u00a0kg)1993-05-04FloridaG14Gilyard, Jacob\u00a0(TW)5\u00a0ft 8\u00a0in (1.73\u00a0m)160\u00a0lb (73\u00a0kg)1998-07-14RichmondF2Johnson, Cameron6\u00a0ft 8\u00a0in (2.03\u00a0m)210\u00a0lb (95\u00a0kg)1996-03-03North CarolinaG45Johnson, Keon\u00a0(TW)6\u00a0ft 5\u00a0in (1.96\u00a0m)185\u00a0lb (84\u00a0kg)2002-03-10TennesseeF16Martin, Jaylen\u00a0(TW)6\u00a0ft 5\u00a0in (1.96\u00a0m)216\u00a0lb (98\u00a0kg)2004-01-28FSUS (FL)G17Schr\u00f6der, Dennis6\u00a0ft 1\u00a0in (1.85\u00a0m)175\u00a0lb (79\u00a0kg)1993-09-15GermanyF/C20Sharpe, Day'Ron6\u00a0ft 11\u00a0in (2.11\u00a0m)265\u00a0lb (120\u00a0kg)2001-11-06North CarolinaG/F10Simmons, Ben\u00a06\u00a0ft 11\u00a0in (2.11\u00a0m)240\u00a0lb (109\u00a0kg)1996-07-20LSUG4Smith, Dennis Jr.6\u00a0ft 2\u00a0in (1.88\u00a0m)205\u00a0lb (93\u00a0kg)1997-11-25NC StateG24Thomas, Cam6\u00a0ft 3\u00a0in (1.91\u00a0m)210\u00a0lb (95\u00a0kg)2001-10-13LSUG/F8Walker, Lonnie IV6\u00a0ft 4\u00a0in (1.93\u00a0m)204\u00a0lb (93\u00a0kg)1998-12-14Miami (FL)F9Watford, Trendon6\u00a0ft 8\u00a0in (2.03\u00a0m)237\u00a0lb (108\u00a0kg)2000-11-09LSUF0Whitehead, Dariq\u00a06\u00a0ft 7\u00a0in (2.01\u00a0m)220\u00a0lb (100\u00a0kg)2004-08-01DukeF22Wilson, Jalen6\u00a0ft 8\u00a0in (2.03\u00a0m)225\u00a0lb (102\u00a0kg)2000-11-04KansasHead coachJordi Fern\u00e1ndezAssistant coach(es)Ronnie BurrellAdam CapornRyan Forehan-KellyTrevor HendryJay HernandezCorey VinsonWill WeaverLegend(C) Team captain(DP) Unsigned draft pick(FA) Free agent(S) Suspended(GL) On assignment to G League affiliate(TW) Two-way affiliate player InjuredRoster  Last transaction: April 22, 2024Retained draft rights[edit]The Nets hold the draft rights to the following unsigned draft picks who have been playing outside the NBA. A drafted player, either an international draftee or a college draftee who is not signed by the team that drafted him, is allowed to sign with any non-NBA team. In this case, the team retains the player's draft rights in the NBA until one year after the player's contract with the non-NBA team ends.[81] This list includes draft rights that were acquired from trades with other teams.DraftRoundPickPlayerPos.NationalityCurrent teamNote(s)Ref2019260Vanja Marinkovi\u0107G/F\u00a0SerbiaSaski Baskonia (Spain)Acquired from the Sacramento Kings (via LA Clippers and Memphis)[82]2016239David MichineauG\u00a0FranceBursaspor \u0130nfo Yat\u0131r\u0131m (Turkey)Acquired from the Sacramento Kings (via LA Clippers and New Orleans)[83]2015126Nikola MilutinovC\u00a0SerbiaOlympiacos (Greece)Acquired from the San Antonio Spurs[84]2015239Juan Pablo VauletF\u00a0ArgentinaBaxi Manresa (Spain)Acquired from the Indiana Pacers (via Brooklyn and Charlotte)[85]2015249Aaron WhiteF\u00a0United StatesKumamoto Volters (Japan)Acquired from the Washington Wizards[86]2014254Nemanja Dangubi\u0107G/F\u00a0SerbiaPeristeri (Greece)Acquired from the Philadelphia 76ers (via San Antonio)[86]Franchise leaders[edit]Main article: Brooklyn Nets accomplishments and recordsBold denotes still active with the team. Italics denotes still active, but not with the team. \"Name*\" includes combined statistics for the team from both the ABA and NBA.Points scored (regular season) as of the end of the 2023\u201324 season[87]Brook Lopez (10,444)Buck Williams (10,440)Vince Carter (8,834)Richard Jefferson (8,507)Jason Kidd (7,373)John Williamson* (7,202)Julius Erving* (7,104)Kerry Kittles (7,096)Derrick Coleman (6,930)Chris Morris (6,762)Mike Gminski (6,415)Billy Paultz* (6,297)Bill Melchionni* (6,230)Otis Birdsong (5,968)Keith Van Horn (5,700)Albert King (5,595)Joe Harris (5,007)Spencer Dinwiddle (4,953)Kendall Gill (4,932)Darwin Cook (4,699)Other statistics (regular season) as of the end of the 2023\u201324 season[87]Most minutes playedPlayerMinutesBuck Williams23,100Jason Kidd18,733Brook Lopez18,118Richard Jefferson17,499Kerry Kittles16,686Most reboundsPlayerReboundsBuck Williams7,576Billy Paultz*4,544Brook Lopez4,004Derrick Coleman3,690Mike Gminski3,671Most assistsPlayerAssistsJason Kidd4,620Bill Melchionni*3,044Kenny Anderson2,363Deron Williams2,078Spencer Dinwiddle1,985Most stealsPlayerStealsJason Kidd950Darwin Cook875Kerry Kittles803Chris Morris784Kendall Gill652Most blocksPlayerBlocksBrook Lopez972George Johnson863Buck Williams696Mike Gminski599Derrick Coleman559Retired numbers[edit]See also: List of National Basketball Association retired jersey numbersNew York / New Jersey / Brooklyn Nets retired numbers hanging prior to the NBA pre-season game between the Nets and the New York Knicks in October 2018Brooklyn Nets retired numbers[88]No.PlayerPositionTenureDate3Dra\u017een Petrovi\u0107G1991\u20131993November 11, 19935Jason KiddG2001\u20132008October 17, 201323John WilliamsonG1973\u20131980December 7, 199025Bill MelchionniG1969\u20131976September 197632Julius ErvingF1973\u20131976April 3, 198752Buck WilliamsF1981\u20131989April 11, 1999The NBA retired Bill Russell's No. 6 for all its member teams on August 11, 2022.[89][90]Basketball Hall of Famers[edit]PlayersNo.NamePositionTenureInducted24Rick Barry[91]F1970\u2013197219871Nate Archibald[92]G1976\u20131977199132Julius Erving[93]F1973\u20131976199321Bob McAdoo[94]C198120003Dra\u017een Petrovi\u0107[95]G1991\u20131993200234Mel Daniels[96]C1976201222Bernard King[97]F1977\u20131979201330199333Alonzo Mourning[98]C2003\u20132004201455Dikembe Mutombo[99]C2002\u20132003201510Maurice Cheeks[100]G1992\u2013199320185Jason Kidd[a][101]G2001\u2013200820182Kevin Garnett[102]F2013\u20132015202034Paul PierceF2013\u20132014202115Vince CarterG/F2004\u201320092024CoachesNamePositionTenureInductedLou Carnesecca[103]Head coach1970\u201319731992Chuck Daly[b][104]Head coach1992\u201319941994Larry Brown[105]Head coach1981\u201319832002John Calipari[106]Head coach1996\u201319992015Bill Fitch[107]Head coach1989\u201319922019ContributorsNamePositionTenureInductedRod Thorn[108]Assistant coach1973\u20131975, 1976\u201319782018Executive2000\u20132010Del Harris[109]Assistant coach2009\u201320102022Notes^ Also served as head coach of the team in 2013\u20132014.^ Daly was inducted into the Hall of Fame twice\u2014as coach and as a member of the 1992 Olympic team.FIBA Hall of Fame[edit]PlayersNo.NamePositionTenureInducted3Dra\u017een Petrovi\u0107[110]G1991\u20131993200733Alonzo MourningC2003\u201320042019CoachesNamePositionTenureInductedChuck Daly[a]Head coach1992\u201319942021Notes^ Daly was inducted into the FIBA Hall of Fame twice\u2014as coach and as a member of the 1992 Olympic team.Individual awards[edit]NBA[edit]NBA Rookie of the YearBuck Williams\u00a0\u2013 1982Derrick Coleman\u00a0\u2013 1991NBA Executive of the YearRod Thorn\u00a0\u2013 2002NBA Sportsmanship AwardPatty Mills\u00a0\u2013 2022J. Walter Kennedy Citizenship AwardWayne Ellington\u00a0\u2013 2016All-NBA First TeamJason Kidd\u00a0\u2013 2002, 2004All-NBA Second TeamBuck Williams\u00a0\u2013 1983Jason Kidd\u00a0\u2013 2003Kevin Durant\u00a0\u2013 2022All-NBA Third TeamDerrick Coleman\u00a0\u2013 1993, 1994Dra\u017een Petrovi\u0107\u00a0\u2013 1993Stephon Marbury\u00a0\u2013 2000Kyrie Irving\u00a0\u2013 2021NBA All-Defensive First TeamJason Kidd\u00a0\u2013 2002, 2006NBA All-Defensive Second TeamBuck Williams\u00a0\u2013 1988Jason Kidd\u00a0\u2013 2003\u20132005, 2007NBA All-Rookie First TeamBernard King\u00a0\u2013 1978Buck Williams\u00a0\u2013 1982Derrick Coleman \u2013 1991Keith Van Horn\u00a0\u2013 1998Kenyon Martin\u00a0\u2013 2001Brook Lopez\u00a0\u2013 2009Mason Plumlee\u00a0\u2013 2014NBA All-Rookie Second TeamChris Morris\u00a0\u2013 1989Kerry Kittles\u00a0\u2013 1997Richard Jefferson\u00a0\u2013 2002Nenad Krsti\u0107\u00a0\u2013 2004Marcus Williams\u00a0\u2013 2007MarShon Brooks\u00a0\u2013 2012Bojan Bogdanovi\u0107\u00a0\u2013 2015ABA[edit]ABA Most Valuable PlayerJulius Erving\u00a0\u2013 1974\u20131976ABA Playoffs Most Valuable PlayerJulius Erving\u00a0\u2013 1974, 1976ABA Rookie of the YearBrian Taylor\u00a0\u2013 1973All-ABA Team First TeamRick Barry\u00a0\u2013 1971, 1972Bill Melchionni\u00a0\u2013 1972Julius Erving\u00a0\u2013 1974\u20131976All-ABA Team Second TeamBrian Taylor\u00a0\u2013 1975ABA All-Time TeamRick Barry\u00a0\u2013 1997Julius Erving\u00a0\u2013 1997Billy Paultz\u00a0\u2013 1997ABA All-Time MVPJulius Erving\u00a0\u2013 1997ABA All-Defensive TeamMike Gale\u00a0\u2013 1974Brian Taylor\u00a0\u2013 1975, 1976Julius Erving\u00a0\u2013 1976ABA All-Rookie TeamJohn Roche\u00a0\u2013 1972Jim Chones\u00a0\u2013 1973Brian Taylor\u00a0\u2013 1973Larry Kenon\u00a0\u2013 1974John Williamson\u00a0\u2013 1974Kim Hughes\u00a0\u2013 1976NBA All-Star Weekend[edit]NBA All-Star GameBuck Williams\u00a0\u2013 1982, 1983, 1986Otis Birdsong\u00a0\u2013 1984Micheal Ray Richardson\u00a0\u2013 1985Kenny Anderson\u00a0\u2013 1994Derrick Coleman\u00a0\u2013 1994Jayson Williams\u00a0\u2013 1998Stephon Marbury\u00a0\u2013 2001Jason Kidd\u00a0\u2013 2002\u20132004, 2007,[a] 2008Kenyon Martin\u00a0\u2013 2004Vince Carter\u00a0\u2013 2005\u20132007Devin Harris\u00a0\u2013 2009Deron Williams\u00a0\u2013 2012Brook Lopez\u00a0\u2013 2013Joe Johnson\u00a0\u2013 2014D'Angelo Russell\u00a0\u2013 2019Kevin Durant\u00a0\u2013 2021, 2022,[b] 2023[c]James Harden\u00a0\u2013 2021, 2022Kyrie Irving\u00a0\u2013 2021, 2023NBA All-Star Game head coachesByron Scott\u00a0\u2013 2002ABA All-Star Game[edit]ABA All-Star GameJulius Erving \u2013 1974, 1975, 1976Bill Melchionni \u2013 1971, 1972, 1973Billy Paultz \u2013 1973, 1974,[d] 1975Rick Barry \u2013 1971, 1972Larry Kenon \u2013 1974, 1975Brian Taylor \u2013 1975, 1976Tony Jackson \u2013 1968Walt Simon \u2013 1969Levern Tart \u2013 1970ABA All-Star Game head coachesKevin Loughery\u00a0\u2013 1975, 1976ABA Slam Dunk ContestJulius Erving \u2013 1976NBA D-League/G League affiliation[edit]The Nets signed an agreement with the Springfield Armor to become its exclusive NBA Development League affiliate starting in the 2011\u201312 season. This made the Nets the second team to opt for a D-League \"hybrid affiliation\", the first being the Houston Rockets with the Rio Grande Valley Vipers. Springfield ownership maintained control over business, marketing, and day-to-day operations, with the Nets having control over coaching and player decisions. This hybrid model was well received by GMs and owners.[111] However, after three seasons, the Detroit Pistons purchased the Armor from its former owners, and moved and renamed the team the Grand Rapids Drive.[112]On November 6, 2015, the Nets announced that they had purchased a new D-League team to be called the Long Island Nets. The team played their home games during the 2016\u201317 season at the Barclays Center and then at the Nassau Coliseum in Uniondale, New York, after renovations were complete for the 2017\u201318 season. The Long Island Nets became the twelfth D-League team to be owned by an NBA team.[113]Media[edit]See also: List of Brooklyn Nets broadcastersThis section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources:\u00a0\"Brooklyn Nets\"\u00a0\u2013\u00a0news\u00a0\u00b7 newspapers\u00a0\u00b7 books\u00a0\u00b7 scholar\u00a0\u00b7 JSTOR (March 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this message)The television home of the Nets is currently the YES Network, which the team helped create while they were under the corporate umbrella of YankeeNets LLC, a merger of business operations between the Nets and the New York Yankees. After the dissolution of YankeeNets and Bruce Ratner's purchase of the team, YES signed a long-term deal to keep broadcasting Nets games. The sale to the Ratner group did not include the percentage of YES that was previously owned by the Nets, which remains with the pre-merger Nets owners. Prior to that, the Nets' TV home was Fox Sports Net New York and SportsChannel New York.Select playoff games air over-the-air on WWOR-TV instead of on YES, this is only when Yankees games are airing at the same time. Previously these games aired on WLNY-TV or WPIX.The current flagship radio station of the Nets is WFAN, which took over the radio rights to the Nets after losing their basketball contract with the Knicks (who moved to WEPN). Prior to that, Nets games aired on WNEW, WMCA, WVNJ, WNBC, WQEW, and WOR.In the club's early ABA years, some Sunday road games were televised in a package carried by WPIX. The team's later ABA tenure featured more frequent road telecasts on their current broadcast partner, WWOR-TV. Known then as WOR-TV, it continued airing road games for a time once the team joined the NBA in 1976.Television[edit]Ian Eagle has been the sole television play-by-play announcer for the Nets since the departure of Marv Albert in 2011. Eagle became the lead television voice for the team in 1995 after serving as the team's radio voice for one year, while Albert joined the Nets following his firing by MSG Network in 2005 after four decades as the lead voice of the New York Knicks. When Albert joined the broadcast team, he became the lead broadcaster with Eagle as his substitute; beginning in the 2009\u201310 season, due to Albert's advancing age and his other commitments, Eagle once again assumed the lead play-by-play spot. Ryan Ruocco substitutes for Eagle during the latter's CBS NFL and NCAA commitments.As of 2024, Sarah Kustok, Ian Eagle, Ryan Ruocco, and/or Noah Eagle provide color commentary on YES Network broadcasts, and Meghan Triplett serves as courtside reporter. Vince Carter and Richard Jefferson occasionally join YES Network boadcasts.[citation needed]Radio[edit]WFAN is the Nets' current radio flagship, the station having assumed radio rights from WOR following the 2003\u201304 season. Chris Carrino and Tim Capstraw comprise the broadcast team, Carrino on play-by-play and Capstraw as the analyst. The games air on other Entercom-operated stations, such as WCBS (AM) and WXBK, when there are programming conflicts on WFAN.Other broadcasters who have worked for the Nets include Howard David, Bob Papa, Bill Raftery, Kelly Tripucka, Albert King, Mike O'Koren, Spencer Ross, Mel Proctor, Joe Tait, John Sterling, John Minko and Mark Jackson.Nets games have also aired on WNEW and WQEW in the past.During the club's ABA years, announcers included Marty Glickman, Marv Albert's brothers Al Albert and Steve Albert, baseball Hall of Fame pitcher Bob Gibson, Bob Goldsholl, as well as Sterling and Vince DiTomasso. The latter two joined the club's move into the NBA.References[edit]Notes^ Did not participate^ Did not participate^ Did not participate^ Did not participateSources^ \"History: Team by Team\" (PDF). 2018-19 Official NBA Guide (PDF). NBA Properties, Inc. October 8, 2018. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 11, 2019. Retrieved June 1, 2019.^ \"NBA.com/Stats\u2013Brooklyn Nets seasons\". Stats.NBA.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on December 2, 2022. Retrieved December 1, 2022.^ \"Brooklyn Nets Unveil Black & White Team Colors and Logos\". BrooklynNets.com (Press release). NBA Media Ventures, LLC. April 30, 2012. Archived from the original on May 13, 2023. Retrieved July 2, 2015.^ \"Nets Logo History\". BrooklynNets.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on December 11, 2019. Retrieved September 19, 2019.^ \"Brooklyn Nets Reproduction and Usage Guideline Sheet\". NBA Properties, Inc. Archived from the original on July 27, 2020. Retrieved November 19, 2019.^ \"Brooklyn Nets and New York Liberty form Global Multi-year Partnership with Webull\". BrooklynNets.com (Press release). NBA Media Ventures, LLC. September 27, 2021. Archived from the original on September 27, 2021. Retrieved September 28, 2021.^ \"Sam Zussman\". BrooklynNets.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on January 29, 2023. Retrieved January 28, 2023.^ \"Sports and Entertainment Industry Veteran Sam Zussman Named Chief Executive Officer of BSE Global\". BrooklynNets.com (Press release). NBA Media Ventures, LLC. June 9, 2022. Archived from the original on February 5, 2024. Retrieved February 5, 2024.^ \"Mikhail Prokhorov to Sell Full Ownership of Barclays Center and Controlling Interest in the Brooklyn Nets to Joe Tsai\". BrooklynNets.com (Press release). NBA Media Ventures, LLC. August 16, 2019. Archived from the original on August 16, 2019. Retrieved August 17, 2019.^ \"Joe Tsai Completes Acquisition of Full Ownership of Brooklyn Nets and Barclays Center\". BrooklynNets.com (Press release). NBA Media Ventures, LLC. September 18, 2019. Archived from the original on September 20, 2019. Retrieved September 19, 2019.^ Shoals, Bethlehem (March 19, 2020). \"Jason Kidd | Biography & Facts\". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on October 18, 2020. Retrieved February 21, 2021.^ a b \"Jay-Z Announces He Will Open the Barclays Center in September 2012\". BrooklynNets.com (Press release). NBA Media Ventures, LLC. September 26, 2011. Archived from the original on September 30, 2011. Retrieved September 27, 2011.^ Cacciola, Scott (October 2, 2012). \"Nets Calling on Brooklyn Dodgers\". Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on April 1, 2021. Retrieved April 1, 2021.^ \"New York Americans\" (PDF). remembertheaba.com. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 25, 2010. Retrieved January 2, 2011.^ Moffie, Jonathan (October 31, 2012). \"Nets, Knicks Ignite Crosstown Rivalry\". The New York Times. New York. Archived from the original on September 29, 2013.^ Araton, Harvey (July 5, 2012). \"Nets, After a String of Homes, Hope to Settle Into Brooklyn\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 15, 2021. Retrieved April 1, 2021. To afford the payments required to join the N.B.A. in 1976 and compete in Knicks territory, they sold Julius Erving, a future Hall of Famer, to the Philadelphia 76ers.^ Swayne, Linda E.; Dodds, Mark, eds. (August 8, 2011). Encyclopedia of Sports Management and Marketing. Sage Publications. p.\u00a0933. ISBN\u00a0978-1-4129-7382-3.^ Grasso, John (November 15, 2010). Historical Dictionary of Basketball. Scarecrow Press. p.\u00a0262. ISBN\u00a09780810875067.^ Carvajal, Kathy (September 26, 2011). \"Jay Z: NBA Nets Renamed 'Brooklyn Nets'\". My Fox NY. Archived from the original on September 27, 2011. Retrieved September 27, 2011.^ \"NBA approves Nets move to Brooklyn\". New York Post. April 13, 2012. Archived from the original on May 16, 2021. Retrieved April 1, 2021.^ Youngmisuk, Ohm; Everson, Darren (May 20, 2002). \"Celtics Talk A Good Game\u00a0\u2013 New York Daily News\". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on March 8, 2012. Retrieved April 13, 2011.^ Steve WilsteinAP Sports Writer (May 31, 2002). \"Celtics fans' taunts hurt Jason Kidd's wife | Amarillo.com | Amarillo Globe-News\". Amarillo.com. Archived from the original on October 19, 2013. Retrieved October 16, 2013.^ \"Nets, Celtics heating it up\". Enquirer.com. May 31, 2002. Archived from the original on October 17, 2019. Retrieved October 16, 2013.^ Peter, May (November 30, 2012). \"Suspension and 2 Fines After Brawl\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 8, 2017. Retrieved February 6, 2017.^ Lewis, Brian (November 27, 2019). \"Even injured and absent, Kyrie Irving isn't welcome in Boston\". New York Post. Archived from the original on December 7, 2019. Retrieved December 11, 2019.^ \"Nets fans clap back with 'Kyrie's better' chant with Kemba Walker at line\". NBC Sports Boston. November 29, 2019. Archived from the original on December 11, 2019. Retrieved December 11, 2019.^ Andrews, Malika; Bontemps, Tim (May 27, 2021). \"Boston Celtics fan arrested after allegedly throwing water bottle at Kyrie Irving\". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on March 27, 2022. Retrieved June 1, 2021.^ Vecsey, George (November 25, 2012). \"A Rivalry to Add to the City's Rich History\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 21, 2017. Retrieved February 6, 2017.^ Dell, Chris (October 31, 2012). \"Islanders Fans React to Barclays Center Move\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 4, 2013.^ Dell, Chris (November 27, 2011). \"Knicks and Nets Rivalry Begins at Barclays\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 1, 2012.^ \"Clash of the Boroughs Resounds in Brooklyn\". BrooklynNets.com. Archived from the original on January 29, 2013. Retrieved November 26, 2012.^ Rausch, William (April 18, 2014). \"A Brief History Of The Nets-Raptors Rivalry\". The Brooklyn Game. Archived from the original on July 4, 2015. Retrieved July 3, 2015.^ \"Raptors receive three players and two picks\". ESPN.com. Indianapolis. Associated Press. December 18, 2004. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved June 20, 2014.^ \"Jefferson's late basket sends Nets to second round\". ESPN.com. Associated Press. Archived from the original on August 8, 2014. Retrieved June 20, 2014.^ \"Paul Pierce's block leads Nets past Raptors in Game 7\". ESPN.com. Associated Press. Archived from the original on July 7, 2014. Retrieved June 20, 2014.^ Slam Staff (April 19, 2014). \"Raptors GM Masai Ujiri Shouts 'F*** Brooklyn' at Fan Rally (Video)\". SLAM Magazine. Archived from the original on July 3, 2015. Retrieved July 3, 2015.^ \"Raptors overwhelm Nets 150-122 to finish first-round sweep\". ESPN.com. August 23, 2020. Archived from the original on August 24, 2020. Retrieved November 30, 2020.^ a b c d e f g h i j k \"Nets uniform history\". BrooklynNets.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on December 4, 2020. Retrieved October 17, 2020.^ \"Brooklyn Nets 22/23 City Edition Uniform: Brooklyn Graffiti\". NBA.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on November 10, 2022. Retrieved November 10, 2022.^ \"2021\u201322 Nets City uniform\". BrooklynNets.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on November 2, 2021. Retrieved November 3, 2021.^ \"Brooklyn Nets Unveil 2023-24 Nike NBA City Edition Uniform, Created With Renowned Artist KAWS\". BrooklynNets.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on November 26, 2023. Retrieved October 20, 2023.^ \"Sly, the Silver Fox\". NBA.com. Archived from the original on November 1, 2004. Retrieved August 1, 2012.^ Curry, Jack (December 15, 1990). \"Pro Basketball \u2013 For Nets, Stakes Are High In Meeting With Knicks\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 21, 2013. Retrieved August 1, 2012.^ \"Marvel & the Brooklyn Nets Unveil First Super Hero in NBA history!\". BrooklynNets.com (Press release). NBA Media Ventures, LLC. November 3, 2012. Archived from the original on November 6, 2012. Retrieved November 3, 2012.^ \"BrooklyKnight Debuts at First Brooklyn Nets Game\". Marvel Entertainment. November 5, 2012. Archived from the original on July 4, 2015. Retrieved July 2, 2015.^ Sherman, Rodger (July 9, 2014). \"A farewell to BrooklyKnight, the Brooklyn Nets' awful mascot\". SB Nation. Archived from the original on July 12, 2014. Retrieved July 10, 2014.^ \"Brooklyn: Something to Lean On\". BrooklynNets.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. November 2, 2012. Archived from the original on October 29, 2015. Retrieved July 3, 2015.^ \"The Nets' new anthem: \"Brooklyn (something to lean on)\" is all about the borough (not the \"Nets\")\". Atlantic Yards Report. Archived from the original on September 6, 2013. Retrieved November 20, 2012.^ \"The Brooklyn Brigade\". The Brooklyn Brigade. Archived from the original on February 1, 2021. Retrieved January 27, 2021.^ \"The Fight for New York's Next Generation of Fans Starts in Barclays Center's Lower Bowl\". ESPN.com. January 20, 2020. Archived from the original on January 21, 2021. Retrieved January 27, 2021.^ Almeida, Chris (April 18, 2019). \"Nets Fandom Is Having Its New York Moment\". The Ringer. Archived from the original on February 5, 2021. Retrieved January 27, 2021.^ Whiteside, Kelly (December 3, 2018). \"New York's N.B.A Teams Don't Have Much to Celebrate. These Fans Cheer Anyway\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 1, 2021. Retrieved January 27, 2021.^ \"Joseph Tsai to buy rest of Nets from Mikhail Prokhorov\". NBA.com. Archived from the original on October 21, 2020. Retrieved January 27, 2021.^ Tasch, Justin (February 19, 2016). \"Brooklyn Nets hire Spurs exec Sean Marks to be GM\". nydailynews.com. Archived from the original on February 6, 2021. Retrieved January 27, 2021.^ Scotto, Michael (October 31, 2018). \"How the Nets are betting on 'The Block' to be the heart of a growing Brooklyn fanbase\". The Athletic. Archived from the original on February 1, 2021. Retrieved October 6, 2020. The Nets unveiled 'The Block: Home of the Brooklyn Brigade' in section 114 this season, which is sponsored by East Coast Power and Gas.^ \"The Block\". Brooklyn Nets. Archived from the original on February 8, 2021. Retrieved January 27, 2021.^ \"When Love Blooms in Section 114\". NetsDaily. February 22, 2020. Archived from the original on February 1, 2021. Retrieved January 27, 2021.^ Lunden, Jeff (January 12, 2023). \"Meet Mr. Whammy, the Brooklyn Nets superfan and secret weapon\". Gothamist. Archived from the original on January 13, 2023. Retrieved January 13, 2023.^ \"Meet Nets' superfan Mr. Whammy, one of the stars of Sixers' win\". NBC Sports. January 9, 2017. Archived from the original on January 13, 2023. Retrieved January 14, 2023.^ \"NBA Board of Governors approves sale of Nets to Joe Tsai\". NBA.com. September 18, 2019. Archived from the original on September 18, 2019. Retrieved September 19, 2019.^ \"Leading Media and Sports Executive David Levy Appointed Chief Executive Officer of Brooklyn Nets and Barclays Center\". BrooklynNets.com. September 18, 2019. Archived from the original on September 26, 2019. Retrieved September 18, 2019.^ Speer, Deborah (September 18, 2019). \"Tsai Completes Acquisition Of Barclays Center, Brooklyn Nets; Names David Levy CEO\". Pollstar.com. Archived from the original on September 20, 2019. Retrieved September 19, 2019.^ \"Nets, David Levy agree to part ways\". NBA.com. November 12, 2019. Archived from the original on November 12, 2019. Retrieved December 11, 2019.^ Deb, Sopan; Draper, Kevin (November 12, 2019). \"Nets C.E.O. Abruptly Steps Down\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 11, 2019. Retrieved December 11, 2019.^ \"Arthur J. Brown, 78, Former Owner of Nets\". The New York Times. December 24, 1989. Archived from the original on August 11, 2014. Retrieved June 20, 2014.^ \"Boe owned Nets, Islanders in 1970s\". ESPN. Associated Press. June 8, 2009. Archived from the original on August 10, 2014. Retrieved June 20, 2014.^ Stubits, Brian (June 1, 2014). \"Lewis Katz, former owner of Devils, Nets, dies in plane crash\". CBS Sports. Archived from the original on June 6, 2014. Retrieved June 20, 2014.^ \"A Split Decision \u2013 YankeeNets Group on the Brink of Breakup\". New York Post. June 23, 2003. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Retrieved December 10, 2017.^ Sandomir, Richard; Bagli, Charles V. (January 21, 2004). \"Brooklyn Developer Reaches Deal to Buy New Jersey Nets\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 26, 2013. Retrieved May 10, 2011.^ Cubarrubia, R. J. (April 19, 2013). \"Jay-Z Explains Reason for Selling Brooklyn Nets Stake\". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 24, 2021. Retrieved June 15, 2021.^ Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (April 19, 2013). \"Jay-Z Sells Nets Stake, Earns Warren Buffett-Like Return\". Forbes. Archived from the original on June 24, 2021. Retrieved June 15, 2021.^ Killin, James (January 24, 2014). \"Jay Z faces $600m lawsuit over Brooklyn Nets trademark\". thelineofbestfit.com. Archived from the original on June 24, 2021. Retrieved June 16, 2021. Last year, Jay Z sold his 0.067% stake in the Nets to Taiwanese artist and fellow basketball fan Wilber Pan...^ \"Mikhail Prokhorov Buys New Jersey Nets to Build Them New Arena\". Pravda.ru. September 24, 2009. Archived from the original on September 26, 2009. Retrieved September 24, 2009.^ Eichelberger, Curtis (May 11, 2010). \"Prokhorov's $200 Million Purchase of Nets Gains Approval From NBA Owners\". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on December 6, 2014. Retrieved June 20, 2014.^ \"Porzingis Scores 30, Knicks Beat Nets 107-86 for 1st Win \u2013 Brooklyn Buyer\". The New York Times. Associated Press. October 27, 2017. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Retrieved November 7, 2017.^ \"NBA approves sale of Nets, Barclays to Tsai\". ESPN.com. September 18, 2019. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved February 16, 2021.^ \"Arena History\". BrooklynNets.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on November 15, 2019. Retrieved November 19, 2019.^ \"Nets will be all-Brooklyn by 2015-16: Team unveils $50M Industry City training center\". New York Daily News. June 26, 2014. Archived from the original on August 8, 2014. Retrieved July 31, 2014.^ a b \"Pro Basketball \u2013 Nets' New Practice Facility Befits a First-Class Team\". The New York Times. February 18, 1998. Archived from the original on August 11, 2014. Retrieved July 31, 2014.^ \"Damage moves Nets practices\". New York Post. November 1, 2012. Archived from the original on June 30, 2015. Retrieved July 31, 2014.^ Coon, Larry. \"NBA Salary Cap FAQ \u2013 2011 Collective Bargaining Agreement\". Archived from the original on May 27, 2015. Retrieved April 13, 2014. If the player is already under contract to, or signs a contract with a non-NBA team, the team retains the player's draft rights for one year after the player's obligation to the non-NBA team ends. Essentially, the clock stops as long as the player plays pro ball outside the NBA.^ \"Brooklyn Nets Complete Three-Team Trade with Phoenix and Memphis\". NBA.com. February 8, 2024. Retrieved February 8, 2024.^ \"Kings Complete Trade With Brooklyn Nets\". NBA.com. February 8, 2023. Archived from the original on February 8, 2023. Retrieved February 8, 2023.^ \"Brooklyn Nets acquire future draft considerations in five team trade\". NBA.com. August 6, 2021. Archived from the original on August 7, 2021. Retrieved August 6, 2021.^ \"Suns acquire Kevin Durant from Nets in blockbuster trade\". February 10, 2023. Archived from the original on June 19, 2023. Retrieved June 4, 2023.^ a b \"Brooklyn Nets Complete Three-Team Trade\". BrooklynNets.com. July 6, 2019. Archived from the original on July 6, 2019. Retrieved July 6, 2019.^ a b \"Nets: Players\". Basketball Reference. Archived from the original on April 1, 2023. Retrieved April 10, 2023.^ \"Brooklyn Nets Uniform Numbers\". Basketball Reference. Archived from the original on June 10, 2022. Retrieved April 14, 2019.^ \"Bill Russell's No. 6 jersey to be retired throughout NBA\". NBA.com. August 11, 2022. Archived from the original on August 17, 2022. Retrieved August 18, 2022.^ Golliver, Ben (August 11, 2022). \"NBA permanently retires Bill Russell's No. 6\". Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 7, 2022. Retrieved August 18, 2022.^ \"Rick Barry\". The Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on June 8, 2022. Retrieved April 13, 2019.^ \"Nate Archibald\". The Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on May 26, 2022. Retrieved April 13, 2019.^ \"Julius Erving\". The Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on June 8, 2022. Retrieved April 13, 2019.^ \"Bob McAdoo\". The Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on May 23, 2022. Retrieved April 12, 2019.^ \"Drazen Petrovic\". The Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on May 7, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2019.^ \"Mel Daniels\". The Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on June 8, 2022. Retrieved April 13, 2019.^ \"Bernard King\". The Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on June 8, 2022. Retrieved April 12, 2019.^ \"Alonzo Mourning\". The Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on October 19, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2019.^ \"Dikembe Mutombo\". The Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on October 6, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2019.^ \"Maurice Cheeks\". The Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on September 20, 2021. Retrieved April 13, 2019.^ \"Jason Kidd\". The Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on October 16, 2021. Retrieved April 13, 2019.^ \"Kevin Garnett\". The Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on December 8, 2021. Retrieved April 4, 2020.^ \"Lou Carnesecca\". The Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on June 8, 2022. Retrieved April 13, 2019.^ \"Chuck Daly\". The Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on May 24, 2022. Retrieved April 13, 2019.^ \"Larry Brown\". The Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on May 21, 2022. Retrieved April 13, 2019.^ \"John Calipari\". The Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on October 6, 2016. Retrieved April 13, 2019.^ Campbell, Dave (April 6, 2019). \"Former Rockets coach Bill Fitch to be inducted into 2019 Basketball Hall of Fame\". Houston Chronicle. AP. Archived from the original on April 13, 2019. Retrieved April 13, 2019.^ \"Rod Thorn\". The Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on May 9, 2021. Retrieved April 13, 2019.^ \"Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame announces 13 members for the Class of 2022\". NBA.com. Archived from the original on April 2, 2022. Retrieved June 26, 2022.^ \"Drazen Petrovic\". FIBA Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on June 4, 2022. Retrieved April 13, 2019.^ Matt Moore %BloggerTitle% (November 11, 2010). \"New Jersey Nets, Springfield Armor to Enter Single-Affiliate Partnership\". Aolnews.com. Archived from the original on October 6, 2012. Retrieved May 23, 2012.^ \"Van Gundy looks to make full use of new D-League team\". SB Nation. June 10, 2014. Archived from the original on August 26, 2014. Retrieved June 20, 2014.^ \"Brooklyn Nets Purchase NBA Development League Team\". GLeague.NBA.com (Press release). November 6, 2015. Archived from the original on March 29, 2019. Retrieved February 14, 2021.External links[edit]Wikimedia Commons has media related to Brooklyn Nets.Official website vteBrooklyn NetsFounded in 1967Formerly the New Jersey Americans (1967\u20131968); played in New York (1968\u20131977) and New Jersey (1977\u20132012)Based in Brooklyn, New YorkFranchiseHistoryABA\u2013NBA mergerAll-time rosterDraft historyRecordsHead coachesSeasonsCurrent seasonArenasTeaneck ArmoryLong Island ArenaIsland GardenNassau Veterans Memorial ColiseumRutgers Athletic CenterMeadowlands ArenaPrudential CenterBarclays CenterPersonnelOwner(s)Joseph TsaiGeneral managerSean MarksHead coachJordi Fern\u00e1ndezG League affiliateLong Island NetsRetired numbers3523253252ABA championships19741976RivalriesNew York KnicksToronto RaptorsCulture and loreBroadcastersJust WrightBrooklyKnightMarv AlbertErving for $6 millionForest City Enterprises Category CommonsLinks to related articlesvteBrooklyn Nets seasonsFranchiseSeasons1960s 1967\u201368 1968\u2013691970s 1969\u201370 1970\u201371 1971\u201372 1972\u201373 1973\u201374 1974\u201375 1975\u201376 1976\u201377 1977\u201378 1978\u2013791980s 1979\u201380 1980\u201381 1981\u201382 1982\u201383 1983\u201384 1984\u201385 1985\u201386 1986\u201387 1987\u201388 1988\u2013891990s 1989\u201390 1990\u201391 1991\u201392 1992\u201393 1993\u201394 1994\u201395 1995\u201396 1996\u201397 1997\u201398 1998\u2013992000s 1999\u201300 2000\u201301 2001\u201302 2002\u201303 2003\u201304 2004\u201305 2005\u201306 2006\u201307 2007\u201308 2008\u2013092010s 2009\u201310 2010\u201311 2011\u201312 2012\u201313 2013\u201314 2014\u201315 2015\u201316 2016\u201317 2017\u201318 2018\u2013192020s 2019\u201320 2020\u201321 2021\u201322 2022\u201323 2023\u201324Bold indicates an ABA championshipvteNational Basketball AssociationEasternConferenceAtlanticBoston CelticsBrooklyn NetsNew York KnicksPhiladelphia 76ersToronto RaptorsCentralChicago BullsCleveland CavaliersDetroit PistonsIndiana PacersMilwaukee BucksSoutheastAtlanta HawksCharlotte HornetsMiami HeatOrlando MagicWashington WizardsWesternConferenceNorthwestDenver NuggetsMinnesota TimberwolvesOklahoma City ThunderPortland Trail BlazersUtah JazzPacificGolden State WarriorsLos Angeles ClippersLos Angeles LakersPhoenix SunsSacramento KingsSouthwestDallas MavericksHouston RocketsMemphis GrizzliesNew Orleans PelicansSan Antonio SpursAnnual eventsDrafteligibilitySummer LeagueChristmasMartin Luther King Jr. DayAll-Star weekendgameGlobal GamesCup tournamentPlay-inPlayoffslistfinalschampionsHistoryPredecessorsBAANBLABAmergerWalter A. Brown TrophyCriticisms and controversies2007 Tim Donaghy betting scandalLockoutsFormer divisionsEasternMidwestWesternTeamsdefunctexpansionrelocatedtimelineSeasons2019\u201320 suspension and bubbleRecordsregular seasonpost-seasonAll-Starwin\u2013loss recordsPeoplePlayerscurrent rostersEasternWesternforeign playersrace and ethnicityfirst overall draft pickshighest paidbanned or suspendedNBPAHead coachescurrentplayer-coacheschampionsforeignfemaleNBCAOwnersReferees (NBRA)Awardsand honorsLarry O'Brien TrophyMaurice Podoloff TrophyNBA awardsMVPFinals MVPConference Finals MVPAll-Star MVPHall of FameMembersAnniversary teamsRetired numbersOthersArenasBusinesscollective bargaining agreementjersey sponsorssalary capNBA Storeteam valuationsCulturecheerleadingmascotsdress codesuperteamssleepG LeagueMediaTVNBA TVNBA AcademyRivalriesWNBA\u00a0Basketball portal Category2023\u201324\u00a0seasonvteAmerican Basketball Association teamsAnaheim Amigos/Los Angeles Stars (1967\u201370)Baltimore Claws (1975)Carolina Cougars (1969\u201374)Dallas Chaparrals/Texas Chaparrals (1967\u201373)Denver Rockets/Denver Nuggets (1967\u201376)Houston Mavericks (1967\u201369)Indiana Pacers (1967\u201376)Kentucky Colonels (1967\u201376)Memphis Pros/Memphis Tams/Memphis Sounds (1970\u201375)Miami Floridians/The Floridians (1968\u201372)Minnesota Muskies (1967\u201368)Minnesota Pipers (1968\u201369)New Jersey Americans/New York Nets (1967\u201376)New Orleans Buccaneers (1967\u201370)Oakland Oaks (1967\u201369)Pittsburgh Pipers/Condors (1967\u201368; 1969\u201372)San Antonio Spurs (1973\u201376)San Diego Conquistadors/Sails (1972\u201375)Spirits of St. Louis (1974\u201376)Utah Stars (1970\u201375)Virginia Squires (1970\u201376)Washington Caps (1969\u201370)ABA All-Time TeamvteSports teams based in New York StateBaseballMLBNew York MetsNew York YankeesILBuffalo BisonsRochester Red WingsSyracuse MetsELBinghamton Rumble PoniesSALBrooklyn CyclonesHudson Valley RenegadesALPBLong Island DucksStaten Island FerryHawksEPBLPlattsburgh RedbirdsFLNew York BouldersTri-City ValleyCatsACBLHampton WhalersNYCBLCortland CrushGenesee RapidsHornell DodgersOlean OilersRochester RidgemenRome GeneralsSherrill SilversmithsSyracuse Salt CatsSyracuse SpartansWellsville NitrosPGCBLElmira PioneersJamestown JammersNewark PilotsWatertown RapidsBasketballNBABrooklyn NetsNew York KnicksWNBANew York LibertyG LeagueLong Island NetsWestchester KnicksTBLAlbany PatroonsJamestown JackalsABABuffalo eXtremeNew York Hoop DragonsEntertainment TeamsHarlem WizardsEsportsCDLNew York SublinersOWLNew York ExcelsiorFootballNFLBuffalo BillsAFLAlbany FirebirdsWFANew York SharksEFLWatertown Red & BlackGDFLAlbany Metro MallersHockeyNHLBuffalo SabresNew York IslandersNew York RangersAHLRochester AmericansSyracuse CrunchUtica CometsECHLAdirondack ThunderPWHLPWHL New YorkFPHLBinghamton Black BearsElmira River SharksWatertown WolvesNAHLJamestown RebelsOJHLBuffalo Jr. Sabres EHLNew York Apple Core EHLPAdirondack Junior ThunderEntertainment TeamsBuffalo Sabres Alumni Hockey TeamSoccerMLSNew York City FCUSLSLBrooklyn FC (2024)USLCBrooklyn FC (2025)MLSNPNew York City FC IINISAFlower City UnionNew York Cosmos (hiatus)USL2Blackwatch RushF.A. EuroHudson Valley HammersLong Island Rough RidersManhattan SCPathfinder FCWestchester FlamesNPSLFC BuffaloCedar Stars FCKingston Stockade FCNew York ShockersWPSLBrooklyn City FCClarkstown SCDowntown United SCFox Soccer AcademyNew York Athletic ClubNew York Dutch Lions FCNew York ShockersSUSA FCUnited Women's SoccerAlbany RushFC BerlinFC BuffaloRochester Lady LancersSyracuse PulseUSL W LeagueLong Island Rough RidersMASLUtica City FCLacrosseMLLNew York LizardsNLLAlbany FireWolvesBuffalo BanditsRochester KnighthawksNew York RiptideUWLXLong Island SoundWPLLNew York FightUpstate PrideRoller derbyWFTDAAssault City Roller DerbyCentral New York Roller DerbyGotham Roller DerbyHellions of TroyHudson Valley Horrors Roller DerbyIthaca League of Women RollersLong Island Roller RebelsQueen City Roller DerbyRoc City Roller DerbySuburbia Roller DerbyMRDANew York Shock ExchangeRugby leagueUSARLWhite Plains WombatsNARLNew York R.L.F.C.Rugby unionMLRRugby New YorkUSARNew York Athletic Club RFCOld BlueTeam tennisWTTNew York EmpireCollege athletics(NCAA Division I)Adelphi Panthers (women's bowling)Albany Great DanesArmy Black KnightsBinghamton BearcatsBuffalo BullsBrockport Golden Eagles (women's gymnastics)Clarkson Golden Knights (men's and women's ice hockey)Canisius Golden GriffinsCCNY Beavers (women's fencing)Colgate RaidersColumbia LionsCortland Red Dragons (women's gymnastics)Cornell Big RedDaemen Wildcats (women's bowling and men's volleyball)Dominican Chargers (men's volleyball)D'Youville Saints (men's volleyball)Fordham RamsHilbert Hawks (women's bowling)Hobart Statesmen (men's lacrosse)Hofstra PrideHunter Hawks (men's and women's fencing)Ithaca Bombers (women's gymnastics)Iona GaelsLe Moyne DolphinsLIU SharksManhattan JaspersMarist Red FoxesMolloy Lions (women's bowling)NYU Violets (men's and women's fencing)Niagara Purple EaglesQueens Knights (women's fencing)RPI Engineers (men's and women's ice hockey)Roberts Wesleyan Redhawks (women's bowling and men's volleyball)Rochester Yellowjackets (men's squash)RIT Tigers (men's and women's ice hockey)St. Bonaventure BonniesSt. John's Red StormSt. Lawrence Saints (men's and women's ice hockey)St. Thomas Aquinas Spartans (men's volleyball)Siena SaintsStony Brook SeawolvesSyracuse OrangeUnion Garnet Chargers (men's and women's ice hockey)Vassar Brewers (men's and women's fencing)Wagner SeahawksYeshiva Maccabees (men's and women's fencing)College athletics(NCAA Division II)Adelphi PanthersDaemen WildcatsDominican ChargersDowling Golden LionsD'Youville SaintsMercy MavericksMolloy LionsNYIT Bears (Suspended)Pace SettersQueens KnightsRoberts Wesleyan RedhawksSaint Rose Golden KnightsSt. Thomas Aquinas SpartansStaten Island DolphinsCollege athletics(NCAA Division III)Alfred SaxonsAlfred State PioneersBard RaptorsBaruch BearcatsBrockport Golden EaglesBrooklyn BulldogsBuffalo State BengalsCanton RoosCazenovia WildcatsCCNY BeaversClarkson Golden KnightsCobleskill Fighting TigersCortland Red DragonsDelhi BroncosElmira Soaring EaglesFarmingdale RamsFredonia Blue DevilsGeneseo KnightsHamilton ContinentalsHartwick HawksHilbert HawksHobart StatesmenHoughton HighlandersHunter HawksIthaca BombersJohn Jay BloodhoundsKeuka WolvesLehman Lightning BugsManhattanville ValiantsMedgar Evers CougarsMerchant Marine MarinersMaritime PrivateersMount Saint Mary Blue KnightsMount Saint Vincent DolphinsMorrisville MustangsNazareth Golden FlyersNew Paltz HawksCity Tech Yellow JacketsNYU VioletsOld Westbury PanthersOneonta Red DragonsOswego LakersPlattsburgh CardinalsPotsdam BearsPratt CannonersPurchase PanthersRPI EngineersRochester YellowjacketsRIT TigersRussell Sage GatorsSkidmore ThoroughbredsSt. John Fisher CardinalsSt. Joseph's (Brooklyn) BearsSt. Joseph's (Long Island) Golden EaglesSt. Lawrence SaintsSarah Lawrence GryphonsSUNY Poly WildcatsUnion Garnet ChargersUtica PioneersVassar BrewersWells ExpressWilliam Smith HeronsYeshiva MaccabeesYork CardinalsCollege athletics(USCAA)Albany College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences PanthersBerkeley KnightsBryant & Stratton College, Albany BobcatsBryant & Stratton College, Buffalo BobcatsBryant & Stratton College, Greece BobcatsBryant & Stratton College, Syracuse BobcatsCulinary Institute of America SteelsFive Towns SoundsThe King's LionsPaul Smith's BobcatsSUNY ESF Mighty OaksVaughn WarriorsVilla Maria KnightsWord of Life Bible Institute HuskiesCollege athletics(NJCAA Division I)Globe Institute of Technology KnightsMonroe MustangsASA AvengersCollege athletics(NJCAA Division II)SUNY Erie KatsGenesee CougarsJamestown (Jamestown) JayhawksJamestown (Olean) Cattaraugus JaguarsMonroe TribunesNiagara County ThunderwolvesSUNY Orange ColtsSUNY Sullivan GeneralsHudson Valley VikingsCollege athletics(NJCAA Division III)SUNY Adirondack WolvesBorough of Manhattan PanthersBronx BroncosSUNY Broome HornetsCayuga SpartansClinton CougarsColumbia-Greene TwinsCorning Red BaronsDutchess FalconsFinger Lakes LakersFIT TigersFulton\u2013Montgomery RaidersGenesee CougarsHerkimer County GeneralsHostos CaimansJefferson CannonersMohawk Valley HawksNassau LionsNorth Country SaintsOnondaga LazersQueensborough TigersRockland Fighting HawksSchenectady County RoyalsSuffolk County SharksSUNY Sullivan GeneralsTompkins Cortland PanthersSUNY Ulster SenatorsSee also: Sports in New York City, Sports in Buffalo, Sports in Rochester, Sports in Syracuse, and Sports in New York's Capital DistrictvteSport teams based in the New York metropolitan areaAustralian rulesfootballUSAFLNew York MagpiesBaseballMLBNew York MetsNew York YankeesELSomerset PatriotsSALBrooklyn CyclonesHudson Valley RenegadesALPBLong Island DucksStaten Island FerryHawksFLNew Jersey JackalsNew York BouldersSussex County MinersBasketballNBABrooklyn NetsNew York KnicksWNBANew York LibertyG LeagueLong Island NetsWestchester KnicksABAGarden State WarriorsEntertainment TeamsHarlem WizardsEsportsCDLNew York SublinersOWLNew York ExcelsiorFootballNFLNew York GiantsNew York JetsWFANew York SharksHockeyNHLNew Jersey DevilsNew York IslandersNew York RangersAHLBridgeport IslandersPWHLPWHL New YorkFPHLDanbury Hat TricksLacrosseNLLNew York RiptideRugby leagueUSARLWhite Plains WombatsNARLNew York R.L.F.C.Rugby unionMLRRugby New YorkUSARNew York Athletic Club RFCOld BlueSoccerMLSNew York City FCNew York Red BullsUSLSLBrooklyn FC (2024)NWSLNJ/NY Gotham FCUSLCBrooklyn FC (2025)MLSNPNew York City FC IINew York Red Bulls IIUSL2Cedar Stars RushF.A. EuroLong Island Rough RidersManhattan SCWestchester FlamesNPSLFC MonmouthFC MotownNew York Athletic Club S.C.USLWLong Island Rough RidersManhattan SCWestchester FlamesRoller derbyWFTDAGotham Roller DerbyJersey Shore Roller GirlsLong Island Roller RebelsSuburbia Roller DerbyMRDANew York Shock ExchangeTeam tennisWTTNew York EmpireCollege athleticsNCAADivision IArmyColumbiaFairfieldFairleigh DickinsonFordhamHofstraIonaLIUManhattanNJITPrincetonQuinnipiacRiderRutgersSacred HeartSt. John'sSaint Peter'sSeton HallStony BrookWagnerYaleNCAADivision IIAdelphiBridgeportEast StroudsburgNew HavenNYITSouthern ConnecticutNCAADivision IIIMerchant MarineNYUTCNJUltimateAUDLNew York EmpireGaelic gamesNew York GAA: Gaelic footballHurlingMain article: Sports in the New York metropolitan areaPortals:\u00a0Basketball\u00a0New York City\u00a0New York (state)Authority control databases InternationalVIAF2NationalUnited StatesRetrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Brooklyn_Nets&oldid=1221036576\""},{"link": "https://en.wikipedia.org//wiki/Michael_Jordan", "content": "American basketball player and businessman (born 1963)For other uses, see Michael Jordan (disambiguation).Michael JordanJordan in April 2014Personal informationBorn (1963-02-17) February 17, 1963 (age\u00a061)Brooklyn, New York City, U.S.Listed height6\u00a0ft 6\u00a0in (1.98\u00a0m)Listed weight216\u00a0lb (98\u00a0kg)[a]Career informationHigh schoolEmsley A. Laney(Wilmington, North Carolina)CollegeNorth Carolina (1981\u20131984)NBA draft1984: 1st  round, 3rd overall pickSelected by the Chicago BullsPlaying career1984\u20131993, 1995\u20131998, 2001\u20132003PositionShooting guard / small forwardNumber23, 12,[b] 45Career history1984\u20131993,1995\u20131998Chicago Bulls2001\u20132003Washington WizardsCareer highlights and awards6\u00d7 NBA champion (1991\u20131993, 1996\u20131998)6\u00d7 NBA Finals MVP (1991\u20131993, 1996\u20131998)5\u00d7 NBA Most Valuable Player (1988, 1991, 1992, 1996, 1998)14\u00d7 NBA All-Star (1985\u20131993, 1996\u20131998, 2002, 2003)3\u00d7 NBA All-Star Game MVP (1988, 1996, 1998)10\u00d7 All-NBA First Team (1987\u20131993, 1996\u20131998)All-NBA Second Team (1985)NBA Defensive Player of the Year (1988)9\u00d7 NBA All-Defensive First Team (1988\u20131993, 1996\u20131998)NBA Rookie of the Year (1985)NBA All-Rookie First Team (1985)10\u00d7 NBA scoring champion (1987\u20131993, 1996\u20131998)3\u00d7 NBA steals leader (1988, 1990, 1993)2\u00d7 NBA Slam Dunk Contest champion (1987, 1988)No. 23 retired by Chicago BullsNo. 23 retired by Miami Heat3\u00d7 AP Athlete of the Year (1991\u20131993)Sports Illustrated Sportsperson of the Year (1991)2\u00d7 IBM Award (1985, 1989)NBA anniversary team (50th, 75th)NCAA champion (1982)National college player of the year (1984)2\u00d7 Sporting News National Player of the Year (1983, 1984)2\u00d7 Consensus first-team All-American (1983, 1984)ACC Player of the Year (1984)ACC Athlete of the Year (1984)2\u00d7 First-team All-ACC (1983, 1984)ACC Rookie of the Year (1982)No. 23 retired by North Carolina Tar Heels2\u00d7 USA Basketball Male Athlete of the Year (1983, 1984)McDonald's All-American (1981)First-team Parade All-American (1981)Presidential Medal of Freedom (2016)Career NBA  statisticsPoints32,292 (30.1 ppg)Rebounds6,672 (6.2 rpg)Assists5,633 (5.3 apg)Stats\u00a0 at NBA.comStats\u00a0 at Basketball-Reference.comBasketball Hall of Fame as playerFIBA Hall of Fame as playerMedalsMen's basketballRepresenting the \u00a0United StatesOlympic Games1984 Los AngelesMen's basketball1992 BarcelonaMen's basketballTournament of the Americas1992 PortlandMen's basketballPan American Games1983 CaracasMen's basketballMichael Jeffrey Jordan (born February 17, 1963), also known by his initials MJ,[9] is an American businessman and former professional basketball player. He played fifteen seasons in the National Basketball Association (NBA) between 1984 and 2003, winning six NBA championships with the Chicago Bulls. He was integral in popularizing basketball and the NBA around the world in the 1980s and 1990s,[10] becoming a global cultural icon.[11] His profile on the NBA website states, \"By acclamation, Michael Jordan is the greatest basketball player of all time.\"[12]Jordan played college basketball with the North Carolina Tar Heels. As a freshman, he was a member of the Tar Heels' national championship team in 1982.[5] Jordan joined the Bulls in 1984 as the third overall draft pick[5][13] and quickly emerged as a league star, entertaining crowds with his prolific scoring while gaining a reputation as one of the best defensive players.[14] His leaping ability, demonstrated by performing slam dunks from the free-throw line in Slam Dunk Contests, earned him the nicknames \"Air Jordan\" and \"His Airness\".[5][13] Jordan won his first NBA title with the Bulls in 1991 and followed that achievement with titles in 1992 and 1993, securing a three-peat. Following the murder of his father, Jordan abruptly retired from basketball before the 1993\u201394 NBA season to play Minor League Baseball in the Chicago White Sox organization, but returned to the Bulls in March 1995 and led them to three more championships in 1996, 1997, and 1998, as well as a then-record 72 regular season wins in the 1995\u201396 NBA season.[5] He retired for the second time in January 1999, returning for two more NBA seasons from 2001 to 2003 as a member of the Washington Wizards.[5][13] During his professional career, he was selected to play for the United States national team, winning four gold medals\u2014at the 1983 Pan American Games, 1984 Summer Olympics, 1992 Tournament of the Americas and 1992 Summer Olympics\u2014while also being undefeated.[15]Jordan's individual accolades include six NBA Finals Most Valuable Player (MVP) awards, ten NBA scoring titles (both all-time records), five NBA MVP awards, ten All-NBA First Team designations, nine All-Defensive First Team honors, fourteen NBA All-Star Game selections, three NBA All-Star Game MVP awards, three NBA steals titles, and the 1988 NBA Defensive Player of the Year Award.[13] He holds the NBA records for career regular season scoring average (30.1 points per game) and career playoff scoring average (33.4 points per game).[16] In 1999, he was named the 20th century's greatest North American athlete by ESPN and was second to Babe Ruth on the Associated Press' list of athletes of the century.[5] Jordan was twice inducted into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame, once in 2009 for his individual career,[17] and again in 2010 as part of the 1992 United States men's Olympic basketball team (\"The Dream Team\").[18] He became a member of the United States Olympic Hall of Fame in 2009,[19] a member of the North Carolina Sports Hall of Fame in 2010,[20] and an individual member of the FIBA Hall of Fame in 2015 and a \"Dream Team\" member in 2017.[21][22] Jordan was named to the NBA 50th Anniversary Team in 1996 and to the NBA 75th Anniversary Team in 2021.[23] The trophy for the NBA Most Valuable Player Award is named in his honor.One of the most effectively marketed athletes of his generation, Jordan made many product endorsements.[10][24] He fueled the success of Nike's Air Jordan sneakers, which were introduced in 1984 and remain popular.[25] He starred as himself in the live-action/animation hybrid film Space Jam (1996) and was the central focus of the Emmy-winning documentary series The Last Dance (2020). He became part-owner and head of basketball operations for the Charlotte Hornets (then named the Bobcats) in 2006 and bought a controlling interest in 2010, before selling his majority stake in 2023. He is also the owner of 23XI Racing in the NASCAR Cup Series. In 2016, he became the first billionaire player in NBA history.[26] That year, President Barack Obama awarded him the Presidential Medal of Freedom.[27] As of 2024, his net worth is estimated at $3.2\u00a0billion by Forbes.[28]Early lifeMichael Jeffrey Jordan was born at Cumberland Hospital in Brooklyn, New York City, on February 17, 1963,[29] to bank employee Deloris (n\u00e9e Peoples) and equipment supervisor James R. Jordan Sr.[29][30] He has two older brothers, James R. Jordan Jr. and fellow basketball player Larry Jordan, as well as an older sister named Deloris and a younger sister named Roslyn.[31][32] In 1968, the family moved to Wilmington, North Carolina.[33] Jordan attended Emsley A. Laney High School, where he highlighted his athletic career by playing basketball, baseball, and football. He tried out for the basketball varsity team during his sophomore year, but at a height of 5\u00a0feet 11\u00a0inches (1.80\u00a0m), he was deemed too short. His taller friend Harvest Leroy Smith was the only sophomore to make the team.[34][35]Motivated to prove his worth, Jordan became the star of Laney's junior varsity team and tallied some 40-point games.[34] The following summer, he grew four inches (10\u00a0cm) and trained rigorously.[35] Upon earning a spot on the varsity roster, he averaged more than 25 points per game (ppg) over his final two seasons of high school play.[36] As a senior, he was selected to play in the 1981 McDonald's All-American Game and scored 30 points,[37][38] after averaging 27 ppg,[36] 12 rebounds (rpg),[39][40] and six assists per game (apg) for the season.[40][41][42] He was recruited by numerous college basketball programs, including Duke, North Carolina, South Carolina, Syracuse, and Virginia.[43] In 1981, he accepted a basketball scholarship to the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, where he majored in cultural geography.[44] He chose this field of study because of its relationship to meteorology, as he was interested in a career as a meteorologist.[45][46]College careerJordan going in for a slam dunk for the Laney High School varsity basketball team, c.\u20091979\u201380Jordan in action for North Carolina in 1983As a freshman in coach Dean Smith's team-oriented system, Jordan was named ACC Freshman of the Year after he averaged 13.4 ppg on 53.4% shooting (field goal percentage).[47] He made the game-winning jump shot in the 1982 NCAA Championship game against Georgetown, which was led by future NBA rival Patrick Ewing.[48] Jordan later described this shot as the major turning point in his basketball career.[49][50] During his three seasons with the Tar Heels, he averaged 17.7 ppg on 54.0% shooting and added 5.0 rpg and 1.8 apg.[13]Jordan was selected by consensus to the NCAA All-American First Team in both his sophomore (1983) and junior (1984) seasons.[51][52] After winning the Naismith and the Wooden College Player of the Year awards in 1984, Jordan left North Carolina one year before his scheduled graduation to enter the 1984 NBA draft. Jordan returned to North Carolina to complete his degree in 1986,[53] when he graduated with a Bachelor of Arts degree in geography.[54] In 2002, Jordan was named to the ACC 50th Anniversary men's basketball team honoring the 50 greatest players in ACC history.[55]Professional careerChicago Bulls (1984\u20131993; 1995\u20131998)Early NBA years (1984\u20131987)The Chicago Bulls selected Jordan with the third overall pick of the 1984 NBA draft after Hakeem Olajuwon (Houston Rockets) and Sam Bowie (Portland Trail Blazers). One of the primary reasons why Jordan was not drafted sooner was because the first two teams were in need of a center.[56] Trail Blazers general manager Stu Inman contended that it was not a matter of drafting a center but more a matter of taking Bowie over Jordan, in part because Portland already had Clyde Drexler, who was a guard with similar skills to Jordan.[57] Citing Bowie's injury-laden college career, ESPN named the Blazers' choice of Bowie as the worst draft pick in North American professional sports history.[58]Jordan made his NBA debut at Chicago Stadium on October 26, 1984, and scored 16 points. In 2021, a ticket stub from the game sold at auction for $264,000, setting a record for a collectible ticket stub.[59] During his rookie 1984\u201385 season with the Bulls, Jordan averaged 28.2 ppg on 51.5% shooting,[47] and helped make a team that had won 35% of games in the previous three seasons playoff contenders. He quickly became a fan favorite even in opposing arenas.[60][61][62] Roy S. Johnson of The New York Times described him as \"the phenomenal rookie of the Bulls\" in November,[62] and Jordan appeared on the cover of Sports Illustrated with the heading \"A Star Is Born\" in December.[63][64] The fans voted in Jordan as an All-Star starter during his rookie season.[5] Controversy arose before the 1985 NBA All-Star Game when word surfaced that several veteran players, led by Isiah Thomas, were upset by the amount of attention Jordan was receiving.[5] This led to a so-called \"freeze-out\" on Jordan, where players refused to pass the ball to him.[5] The controversy left Jordan relatively unaffected when he returned to regular season play, and he would go on to be voted the NBA Rookie of the Year.[65] The Bulls finished the season 38\u201344,[66] and lost to the Milwaukee Bucks in four games in the first round of the playoffs.[65]An often-cited moment was on August 26, 1985,[36][67] when Jordan shook the arena during a Nike exhibition game in Trieste, Italy, by shattering the glass of the backboard with a dunk.[68][69] The moment was filmed and is often referred to as an important milestone in Jordan's rise.[69][70] The shoes Jordan wore during the game were auctioned in August 2020 for $615,000, a record for a pair of sneakers.[71][72] Jordan's 1985\u201386 season was cut short when he broke his foot in the third game of the year, causing him to miss 64 games.[73] The Bulls made the playoffs despite Jordan's injury and a 30\u201352 record,[66] at the time the fifth-worst record of any team to qualify for the playoffs in NBA history.[74] Jordan recovered in time to participate in the postseason and performed well upon his return. On April 20 at the Boston Garden, in Game 2 of the First Round, a 135\u2013131 double overtime loss to the eventual NBA Champion Boston Celtics, Jordan scored a playoff career-high 63 points, breaking Elgin Baylor's single-game playoff scoring record.[75] A Celtics team that is often considered one of the greatest in NBA history swept the series in three games.[65][75][76]Jordan completely recovered in time for the 1986\u201387 season,[77] and had one of the most prolific scoring seasons in NBA history; he became the only player other than Wilt Chamberlain to score 3,000 points in a season, averaging a league-high 37.1 ppg on 48.2% shooting.[47][78] In addition, Jordan demonstrated his defensive prowess, as he became the first player in NBA history to record 200 steals and 100 blocked shots in a season.[79] Despite Jordan's success, Magic Johnson won the NBA Most Valuable Player Award.[80] The Bulls reached 40 wins,[66] and advanced to the playoffs for the third consecutive year but were again swept by the Celtics.[65]Pistons roadblock (1987\u20131990)Jordan led the league in scoring during the 1987\u201388 season, averaging 35.0 ppg on 53.5% shooting,[47] and he won his first league MVP Award. He was named the NBA Defensive Player of the Year, as he averaged 1.6 blocks per game (bpg), a league-high 3.1 steals per game (spg),[81] and led the Bulls defense to the fewest points per game allowed in the league.[82] The Bulls finished 50\u201332,[66] and made it out of the first round of the playoffs for the first time in Jordan's career, as they defeated the Cleveland Cavaliers in five games.[83] In the Eastern Conference Semifinals, the Bulls lost in five games to the more experienced Detroit Pistons,[65] who were led by Isiah Thomas and a group of physical players known as the \"Bad Boys\".[84]In the 1988\u201389 season, Jordan again led the league in scoring, averaging 32.5 ppg on 53.8% shooting from the field, along with 8 rpg and 8 apg.[47] During the season, Sam Vincent, Chicago's point guard, was having trouble running the offense, and Jordan expressed his frustration with head coach Doug Collins, who then put Jordan at point guard. In his time as a point guard, Jordan had 10 triple-doubles in 11 games, with averages of 33.6 ppg, 11.4 rpg, 10.8 apg, 2.9 spg, and 0.8 bpg on 51% shooting.[85]The Bulls finished with a 47\u201335 record,[66] and advanced to the Eastern Conference Finals, defeating the Cavaliers and New York Knicks along the way.[86] The Cavaliers series included a career highlight for Jordan when he hit \"The Shot\" over Craig Ehlo at the buzzer in the fifth and final game of the series.[87] In the Eastern Conference Finals, the Pistons again defeated the Bulls, this time in six games,[65] by utilizing their \"Jordan Rules\" method of guarding Jordan, which consisted of double and triple teaming him every time he touched the ball.[5]The Bulls entered the 1989\u201390 season as a team on the rise, with their core group of Jordan and young improving players like Scottie Pippen and Horace Grant, and under the guidance of new coach Phil Jackson.[88] On March 28, 1990, Jordan scored a career-high 69 points in a 117\u2013113 road win over the Cavaliers.[89] He averaged a league-leading 33.6 ppg on 52.6% shooting, to go with 6.9 rpg and 6.3 apg,[47] in leading the Bulls to a 55\u201327 record.[66] They again advanced to the Eastern Conference Finals after beating the Bucks and Philadelphia 76ers;[90] despite pushing the series to seven games, the Bulls lost to the Pistons for the third consecutive season.[65]First three-peat (1991\u20131993)Jordan being defended by Mookie Blaylock (number 10) during a Bulls\u2013Nets game in 1991In the 1990\u201391 season, Jordan won his second MVP award after averaging 31.5 ppg on 53.9% shooting, 6.0 rpg, and 5.5 apg for the regular season.[47] The Bulls finished in first place in their division for the first time in sixteen years and set a franchise record with 61 wins in the regular season.[66] With Scottie Pippen developing into an All-Star, the Bulls had elevated their play. The Bulls defeated the New York Knicks and the Philadelphia 76ers in the opening two rounds of the playoffs. They advanced to the Eastern Conference Finals where their rival, the Detroit Pistons, awaited them;[91] this time, the Bulls beat the Pistons in a four-game sweep.[92]The Bulls advanced to the Finals for the first time in franchise history to face the Los Angeles Lakers, who had Magic Johnson and James Worthy, two formidable opponents. The Bulls won the series four games to one, and compiled a 15\u20132 playoff record along the way.[91] Perhaps the best-known moment of the series came in Game 2 when, attempting a dunk, Jordan avoided a potential Sam Perkins block by switching the ball from his right hand to his left in mid-air to lay the shot into the basket.[93] In his first Finals appearance, Jordan had 31.2 ppg on 56% shooting from the field, 11.4 apg, 6.6 rpg, 2.8 spg, and 1.4 bpg.[94] Jordan won his first NBA Finals MVP award,[95] and he cried while holding the Finals trophy.[96]Jordan and the Bulls continued their dominance in the 1991\u201392 season, establishing a 67\u201315 record, topping their franchise record from the 1990\u201391 campaign.[66] Jordan won his second consecutive MVP award with averages of 30.1 ppg, 6.4 rbg, and 6.1 apg on 52% shooting.[81] After winning a physical seven-game series over the New York Knicks in the second round of the playoffs and finishing off the Cleveland Cavaliers in the Conference Finals in six games, the Bulls met Clyde Drexler and the Portland Trail Blazers in the Finals. The media, hoping to recreate a Magic\u2013Bird rivalry, highlighted the similarities between \"Air\" Jordan and Clyde \"The Glide\" during the pre-Finals hype.[97]In the first game, Jordan scored a Finals-record 35 points in the first half, including a record-setting six three-point field goals.[98] After the sixth three-pointer, he jogged down the court shrugging as he looked courtside. Marv Albert, who broadcast the game, later stated that it was as if Jordan was saying: \"I can't believe I'm doing this.\"[99] The Bulls went on to win Game 1 and defeat the Blazers in six games. Jordan was named Finals MVP for the second year in a row,[95] and finished the series averaging 35.8 ppg, 4.8 rpg, and 6.5 apg, while shooting 52.6% from the floor.[100]In the 1992\u201393 season, despite a 32.6 ppg, 6.7 rpg, and 5.5 apg campaign, including a second-place finish in Defensive Player of the Year voting,[81][101] Jordan's streak of consecutive MVP seasons ended, as he lost the award to his friend Charles Barkley,[80] which upset him.[102] Jordan and the Bulls met Barkley and his Phoenix Suns in the 1993 NBA Finals. The Bulls won their third NBA championship on a game-winning shot by John Paxson and a last-second block by Horace Grant, but Jordan was once again Chicago's leader. He averaged a Finals-record 41.0 ppg during the six-game series,[103] and became the first player in NBA history to win three straight Finals MVP awards.[95] He scored more than 30 points in every game of the series, including 40 or more points in four consecutive games.[104] With his third Finals triumph, Jordan capped off a seven-year run where he attained seven scoring titles and three championships, but there were signs that Jordan was tiring of his massive celebrity and all of the non-basketball hassles in his life.[105]GamblingDuring the Bulls' 1993 NBA playoffs, Jordan was seen gambling in Atlantic City, New Jersey, the night before Game 2 of the Eastern Conference Finals against the New York Knicks.[106] The previous year, he admitted that he had to cover $57,000 in gambling losses,[107] and author Richard Esquinas wrote a book in 1993 claiming he had won $1.25\u00a0million from Jordan on the golf course.[108] David Stern, the commissioner of the NBA, denied in 1995 and 2006 that Jordan's 1993 retirement was a secret suspension by the league for gambling,[109][110] but the rumor spread widely.[111]In 2005, Jordan discussed his gambling with Ed Bradley of 60 Minutes and admitted that he made reckless decisions. Jordan stated: Yeah, I've gotten myself into situations where I would not walk away and I've pushed the envelope. Is that compulsive? Yeah, it depends on how you look at it. If you're willing to jeopardize your livelihood and your family, then yeah. When Bradley asked him if his gambling ever got to the level where it jeopardized his livelihood or family, Jordan replied: \"No.\"[112] In 2010, Ron Shelton, director of Jordan Rides the Bus, said that he began working on the documentary believing that the NBA had suspended him, but that research \"convinced [him it] was nonsense\".[111]First retirement and stint in Minor League Baseball (1993\u20131995)Baseball playerMichael JordanJordan in training with the Scottsdale Scorpions in 1994Birmingham Barons \u2013 No. 45, 35OutfielderBatted: RightThrew: RightProfessional debutSouthern League: April 8,\u00a01994,\u00a0for the\u00a0Birmingham BaronsArizona Fall League: 1994,\u00a0for the\u00a0Scottsdale ScorpionsLast Southern League appearanceMarch 10,\u00a01995,\u00a0for the\u00a0Birmingham BaronsSouthern League statistics (through 1994)Batting average.202Home runs3Runs batted in51Arizona Fall League statisticsBatting average.252Runs batted in8TeamsBirmingham Barons (1994\u20131995)Scottsdale Scorpions (1994)On October 6, 1993, Jordan announced his retirement, saying that he lost his desire to play basketball. Jordan later said that the murder of his father three months earlier helped shape his decision.[113] James R. Jordan Sr. was murdered on July 23, 1993, at a highway rest area in Lumberton, North Carolina, by two teenagers, Daniel Green and Larry Martin Demery, who carjacked his Lexus.[114][115] His body, dumped in a South Carolina swamp, was not discovered until August 3.[115] Green and Demery were sentenced to life in prison.[116]Jordan was close to his father; as a child, he imitated the way his father stuck out his tongue while absorbed in work. He later adopted it as his own signature, often displaying it as he drove to the basket.[5] In 1996, he founded a Chicago-area Boys & Girls Club and dedicated it to his father.[117][118] In his 1998 autobiography For the Love of the Game, Jordan wrote that he was preparing for retirement as early as the summer of 1992.[119] The added exhaustion due to the \"Dream Team\" run in the 1992 Summer Olympics solidified Jordan's feelings about the game and his celebrity status. Jordan's announcement sent shock waves throughout the NBA and appeared on the front pages of newspapers around the world.[120]Jordan further surprised the sports world by signing a Minor League Baseball contract with the Chicago White Sox on February 7, 1994.[121] He reported to spring training in Sarasota, Florida, and was assigned to the team's minor league system on March 31, 1994.[122] Jordan said that this decision was made to pursue the dream of his late father, who always envisioned his son as a Major League Baseball player.[123] The White Sox were owned by Bulls owner Jerry Reinsdorf, who continued to honor Jordan's basketball contract during the years he played baseball.[124]In 1994, Jordan played for the Birmingham Barons, a Double-A minor league affiliate of the Chicago White Sox, batting .202 with three home runs, 51 runs batted in, 30 stolen bases, 114 strikeouts, 51 bases on balls, and 11 errors.[125][126] His strikeout total led the team and his games played tied for the team lead. His 30 stolen bases were second on the team only to Doug Brady.[127] He also appeared for the Scottsdale Scorpions in the 1994 Arizona Fall League, batting .252 against the top prospects in baseball.[122] On November 1, 1994, his No. 23 was retired by the Bulls in a ceremony that included the erection of a permanent sculpture known as The Spirit outside the new United Center.[128][129][130]Return to the NBA (1995)The Bulls went 55\u201327 in 1993\u201394 without Jordan in the lineup[66] and lost to the New York Knicks in the second round of the playoffs.[131] The 1994\u201395 Bulls were a shell of the championship team of just two years earlier. Struggling at mid-season to ensure a spot in the playoffs, Chicago was 31\u201331 at one point in mid-March;[132] the team received help when Jordan decided to return to the Bulls.[133]In March 1995, Jordan decided to quit baseball because he feared he might become a replacement player during the Major League Baseball strike.[134] On March 18, 1995, Jordan announced his return to the NBA in a two-word press release: \"I'm back.\"[135] The next day, Jordan took to the court with the Bulls to face the Indiana Pacers in Indianapolis, scoring 19 points.[136] The game had the highest Nielsen rating of any regular season NBA game since 1975.[137] Although he could have worn his original number even though the Bulls retired it, Jordan wore No. 45, his baseball number.[136]Despite his eighteen-month hiatus from the NBA, Jordan played well, making a game-winning jump shot against Atlanta in his fourth game back. He scored 55 points in his next game, against the New York Knicks at Madison Square Garden on March 28, 1995.[65] Boosted by Jordan's comeback, the Bulls went 13\u20134 to make the playoffs and advanced to the Eastern Conference Semifinals against the Orlando Magic.[138] At the end of Game 1, Orlando's Nick Anderson stripped Jordan from behind, leading to the game-winning basket for the Magic; he later commented that Jordan \"didn't look like the old Michael Jordan\",[139] and said that \"No. 45 doesn't explode like No. 23 used to\".[140]Jordan responded by scoring 38 points in the next game, which Chicago won. Before the game, Jordan decided that he would immediately resume wearing his former No. 23. The Bulls were fined $25,000 for failing to report the impromptu number change to the NBA.[140] Jordan was fined an additional $5,000 for opting to wear white sneakers when the rest of the Bulls wore black.[141] He averaged 31 ppg in the playoffs, but Orlando won the series in six games.[142]Second three-peat (1996\u20131998)Jordan was freshly motivated by the playoff defeat, and he trained aggressively for the 1995\u201396 season.[143] The Bulls were strengthened by the addition of rebound specialist Dennis Rodman, and the team dominated the league, starting the season at 41\u20133.[144] The Bulls eventually finished with the best regular season record in NBA history, 72\u201310, a mark broken two decades later by the 2015\u201316 Golden State Warriors.[145] Jordan led the league in scoring with 30.4 ppg,[146] and he won the league's regular season and All-Star Game MVP awards.[13]In the playoffs, the Bulls lost only three games in four series (Miami Heat 3\u20130, New York Knicks 4\u20131, and Orlando Magic 4\u20130), as they defeated the Seattle SuperSonics 4\u20132 in the NBA Finals to win their fourth championship.[144] Jordan was named Finals MVP for a record fourth time;[95] he achieved only the second sweep of the MVP awards in the All-Star Game, regular season, and NBA Finals after Willis Reed in the 1969\u201370 season.[65] Upon winning the championship, his first since his father's murder, Jordan reacted emotionally, clutching the game ball and crying on the locker room floor.[5][96]In the 1996\u201397 season, the Bulls stood at a 69\u201311 record but ended the season by losing their final two games to finish the year 69\u201313, missing out on a second consecutive 70-win season.[147] The Bulls again advanced to the Finals, where they faced the Utah Jazz.[148] That team included Karl Malone, who had beaten Jordan for the NBA MVP award in a tight race (986\u2013957).[149][150][151] The series against the Jazz featured two of the more memorable clutch moments of Jordan's career. He won Game 1 for the Bulls with a buzzer-beating jump shot. In Game 5, with the series tied at 2, Jordan played despite being feverish and dehydrated from a stomach virus. In what is known as \"The Flu Game\", Jordan scored 38 points, including the game-deciding 3-pointer with 25 seconds remaining.[148] The Bulls won 90\u201388 and went on to win the series in six games.[147] For the fifth time in as many Finals appearances, Jordan received the Finals MVP award.[95] During the 1997 NBA All-Star Game, Jordan posted the first triple-double in All-Star Game history in a victorious effort, but the MVP award went to Glen Rice.[152]Jordan with coach Phil Jackson in 1997Jordan and the Bulls compiled a 62\u201320 record in the 1997\u201398 season.[66] Jordan led the league with 28.7 ppg,[81] securing his fifth regular season MVP award, plus honors for All-NBA First Team, First Defensive Team, and the All-Star Game MVP.[13] The Bulls won the Eastern Conference Championship for a third straight season, including surviving a seven-game series with the Indiana Pacers in the Eastern Conference Finals; it was the first time Jordan had played in a Game 7 since the 1992 Eastern Conference Semifinals with the New York Knicks.[153][154] After winning, they moved on for a rematch with the Jazz in the Finals.[155]The Bulls returned to the Delta Center for Game 6 on June 14, 1998, leading the series 3\u20132. Jordan executed a series of plays, considered to be one of the greatest clutch performances in NBA Finals history.[156] With 41.9 seconds remaining and the Bulls trailing 86\u201383, Phil Jackson called a timeout. When play resumed, Jordan received the inbound pass, drove to the basket, and sank a shot over several Jazz defenders, cutting Utah's lead to 86\u201385.[156] The Jazz brought the ball upcourt and passed the ball to Malone, who was set up in the low post and was being guarded by Rodman. Malone jostled with Rodman and caught the pass, but Jordan cut behind him and stole the ball out of his hands.[156]Jordan then dribbled down the court and paused, eyeing his defender, Jazz guard Bryon Russell. With 10 seconds remaining, Jordan started to dribble right, then crossed over to his left, possibly pushing off Russell, although the officials did not call a foul.[157][158][159][160] With 5.2 seconds left, Jordan made the climactic shot of his Bulls career,[161] a top-key jumper over a stumbling Russell to give Chicago an 87\u201386 lead. Afterwards, the Jazz' John Stockton narrowly missed a game-winning three-pointer, and the buzzer sounded as Jordan and the Bulls won their sixth NBA championship,[162] achieving a second three-peat in the decade.[163] Once again, Jordan was voted Finals MVP for a record sixth time,[95] having led all scorers by averaging 33.5 ppg, including 45 in the deciding Game 6.[164] The 1998 Finals holds the highest television rating of any Finals series,[165] and Game 6 holds the highest television rating of any game in NBA history.[166]Second retirement (1999\u20132001)Plaque at the United Center that chronicles Jordan's career achievementsWith Phil Jackson's contract expiring, the pending departures of Scottie Pippen and Dennis Rodman looming, and being in the latter stages of an owner-induced lockout of NBA players, Jordan retired for the second time on January 13, 1999.[167][168][169] On January 19, 2000, Jordan returned to the NBA not as a player but as part owner and president of basketball operations for the Washington Wizards.[170] Jordan's responsibilities with the Wizards were comprehensive, as he controlled all aspects of the Wizards' basketball operations, and had the final say in all personnel matters; opinions of Jordan as a basketball executive were mixed.[171][172] He managed to purge the team of several highly paid, unpopular players (like forward Juwan Howard and point guard Rod Strickland)[173][174] but used the first pick in the 2001 NBA draft to select high school student Kwame Brown, who did not live up to expectations and was traded away after four seasons.[171][175]Despite his January 1999 claim that he was \"99.9% certain\" he would never play another NBA game,[96] Jordan expressed interest in making another comeback in the summer of 2001, this time with his new team.[176][177] Inspired by the NHL comeback of his friend Mario Lemieux the previous winter,[178] Jordan spent much of the spring and summer of 2001 in training, holding several invitation-only camps for NBA players in Chicago.[179] Jordan hired his old Chicago Bulls head coach, Doug Collins, as Washington's coach for the upcoming season, a decision that many saw as foreshadowing another Jordan return.[176][177]Washington Wizards (2001\u20132003)On September 25, 2001, Jordan announced his return to the NBA to play for the Washington Wizards, indicating his intention to donate his salary as a player to a relief effort for the victims of the September 11 attacks.[180][181] In an injury-plagued 2001\u201302 season, Jordan led the team in scoring (22.9 ppg), assists (5.2 apg), and steals (1.4 spg),[5] and was an MVP candidate, as he led the Wizards to a winning record and playoff contention;[182][183] he would eventually finish 13th in the MVP ballot.[184] After suffering torn cartilage in his right knee,[185] and subsequent knee soreness,[186] the Wizards missed the playoffs,[187] and Jordan's season ended after only 60 games, the fewest he had played in a regular season since playing 17 games after returning from his first retirement during the 1994\u201395 season.[47] Jordan started 53 of his 60 games for the season, averaging 24.3 ppg, 5.4 apg, and 6.0 rpg, and shooting 41.9% from the field in his 53 starts. His last seven appearances were in a reserve role, in which he averaged just over 20 minutes per game.[188] The Wizards finished the season with a 37\u201345 record, an 18-game improvement.[187]Jordan as a member of the Washington Wizards, April 14, 2003Playing in his 14th and final NBA All-Star Game in 2003, Jordan passed Kareem Abdul-Jabbar as the all-time leading scorer in All-Star Game history, a record since broken by Kobe Bryant and LeBron James.[189][190] That year, Jordan was the only Washington player to play in all 82 games, starting in 67 of them, and coming from off the bench in 15. He averaged 20.0 ppg, 6.1 rpg, 3.8 assists, and 1.5 spg per game.[5] He also shot 45% from the field, and 82% from the free-throw line.[47] Even though he turned 40 during the season, he scored 20 or more points 42 times, 30 or more points nine times, and 40 or more points three times.[65] On February 21, 2003, Jordan became the first 40-year-old to tally 43 points in an NBA game.[191] During his stint with the Wizards, all of Jordan's home games at the MCI Center were sold out and the Wizards were the second most-watched team in the NBA, averaging 20,172 fans a game at home and 19,311 on the road.[192] Jordan's final two seasons did not result in a playoff appearance for the Wizards, and he was often unsatisfied with the play of those around him.[193][194] At several points, he openly criticized his teammates to the media, citing their lack of focus and intensity, notably that of Kwame Brown, the number-one draft pick in the 2001 NBA draft.[193][194]Final retirement (2003)With the recognition that 2002\u201303 would be Jordan's final season, tributes were paid to him throughout the NBA. In his final game at the United Center in Chicago, which was his old home court, Jordan received a four-minute standing ovation.[195] The Miami Heat retired the No. 23 jersey on April 11, 2003, even though Jordan never played for the team.[196] At the 2003 All-Star Game, Jordan was offered a starting spot from Tracy McGrady and Allen Iverson but refused both;[197] he accepted the spot of Vince Carter.[198] Jordan played in his final NBA game on April 16, 2003, in Philadelphia. After scoring 13 points in the game, Jordan went to the bench with 4 minutes and 13 seconds remaining in the third quarter and his team trailing the Philadelphia 76ers 75\u201356. Just after the start of the fourth quarter, the First Union Center crowd began chanting \"We want Mike!\" After much encouragement from coach Doug Collins, Jordan finally rose from the bench and re-entered the game, replacing Larry Hughes with 2:35 remaining. At 1:45, Jordan was intentionally fouled by the 76ers' Eric Snow, and stepped to the line to make both free throws. After the second foul shot, the 76ers in-bounded the ball to rookie John Salmons, who in turn was intentionally fouled by Bobby Simmons one second later, stopping time so that Jordan could return to the bench. Jordan received a three-minute standing ovation from his teammates, his opponents, the officials, and the crowd of 21,257 fans.[199]National team careerJordan on the \"Dream Team\" in 1992Jordan made his debut for the U.S. national basketball team at the 1983 Pan American Games in Caracas, Venezuela. He led the team in scoring with 17.3 ppg as the U.S., coached by Jack Hartman, won the gold medal.[200][201] A year later, he won another gold medal in the 1984 Summer Olympics. The 1984 U.S. team was coached by Bob Knight and featured players such as Patrick Ewing, Sam Perkins, Chris Mullin, Steve Alford, and Wayman Tisdale. Jordan led the team in scoring, averaging 17.1 ppg for the tournament.[202]In 1992, Jordan was a member of the star-studded squad that was dubbed the \"Dream Team\", which included Larry Bird and Magic Johnson. The team won two gold medals: the first in the 1992 Tournament of the Americas,[203] and the second in the 1992 Summer Olympics. He was the only player to start all eight games in the Olympics, averaged 14.9 ppg, and finished second on the team in scoring.[204] Jordan was undefeated in the four tournaments he played for the United States national team, winning all 30 games he took part in.[15]Player profileJordan dunking the ball, 1987\u201388Jordan was a shooting guard who could also play as a small forward, the position he would primarily play during his second return to professional basketball with the Washington Wizards,[13] and as a point guard.[85] Jordan was known throughout his career as a strong clutch performer. With the Bulls, he decided 25 games with field goals or free throws in the last 30 seconds, including two NBA Finals games and five other playoff contests.[205] His competitiveness was visible in his prolific trash talk and well-known work ethic.[206][207][208] Jordan often used perceived slights to fuel his performances. Sportswriter Wright Thompson described him as \"a killer, in the Darwinian sense of the word, immediately sensing and attacking someone's weakest spot\".[3] As the Bulls organization built the franchise around Jordan, management had to trade away players who were not \"tough enough\" to compete with him in practice. To improve his defense, he spent hours studying film of opponents. On offense, he relied more upon instinct and improvization.[209]Noted as a durable player, Jordan did not miss four or more games while active for a full season from 1986\u201387 to 2001\u201302, when he injured his right knee.[13][210] Of the 15 seasons Jordan was in the NBA, he played all 82 regular season games nine times.[13] Jordan has frequently cited David Thompson, Walter Davis, and Jerry West as influences.[211][212] Confirmed at the start of his career, and possibly later on, Jordan had a special \"Love of the Game Clause\" written into his contract, which was unusual at the time, and allowed him to play basketball against anyone at any time, anywhere.[213]Jordan had a versatile offensive game and was capable of aggressively driving to the basket as well as drawing fouls from his opponents at a high rate. His 8,772 free throw attempts are the 11th-highest total in NBA history.[214] Early in Jordan's career, he weighed in at around 200 lbs (91kg) and was more athletic in terms of play style.[215] As his career progressed, Jordan also developed the ability to post up his opponents and score with his trademark fadeaway jump shot, using his leaping ability to avoid block attempts. According to Hubie Brown, this move alone made him nearly unstoppable.[216] Around this time, Jordan bulked up to 215 lbs (98kg) in order to adapt to the increased physicality of NBA defenses during the 1990s, sacrificing some athleticism for added strength in the post.[215] Despite media criticism by some as a selfish player early in his career, Jordan was willing to defer to this teammates, with a career average of 5.3 apg and a season-high of 8.0 apg.[47] For a guard, Jordan was also a good rebounder, finishing with 6.2 rpg. Defensively, he averaged 2.3 spg and 0.8 bpg.[47]Three-point field goal was not Jordan's strength, especially in his early years. Later on in Jordan's career, he improved his three-point shooting, and finished his career with a respectable 32% success rate.[47] His three-point field-goal percentages ranged from 35% to 43% in seasons in which he attempted at least 230 three-pointers between 1989\u201390 and 1996\u201397.[13] Jordan's effective field goal percentage was 50%, and he had six seasons with at least 50% shooting, five of which consecutively (1988\u20131992); he also shot 51% and 50%, and 30% and 33% from the three-point range, throughout his first and second retirements, respectively, finishing his Chicago Bulls career with 31.5 points per game on 50.5 FG% shooting and his overall career with 49.7 FG% shooting.[13]Unlike NBA players often compared to Jordan, such as Kobe Bryant and LeBron James, who had a similar three-point percentage, he did not shoot as many threes as they did, as he did not need to rely on the three-pointer to be effective on offense. Three-point shooting was only introduced in 1979 and would not be a more fundamental aspect of the game until the first decades of the 21st century,[217] with the NBA having to briefly shorten the line to incentivize more shots.[218] Jordan's three-point shooting was better selected, resulting in three-point field goals made in important games during the playoffs and the Finals, such as hitting six consecutive three-point shots in Game 1 of the 1992 NBA Finals. Jordan shot 37%, 35%, 42%, and 37% in all the seasons he shot over 200 three-pointers, and also shot 38.5%, 38.6%, 38.9%, 40.3%, 19.4%, and 30.2% in the playoffs during his championship runs, improving his shooting even after the three-point line reverted to the original line.[219][220][221]In 1988, Jordan was honored with the NBA Defensive Player of the Year and the Most Valuable Player awards, becoming the first NBA player to win both awards in a career let alone season. In addition, he set both seasonal and career records for blocked shots by a guard,[222] and combined this with his ball-thieving ability to become a standout defensive player. He ranks fourth in NBA history in total steals with 2,514, trailing John Stockton, Jason Kidd and Chris Paul.[223] Jerry West often stated that he was more impressed with Jordan's defensive contributions than his offensive ones.[224] Doc Rivers declared Jordan \"the best superstar defender in the history of the game\".[225]Jordan was known to have strong eyesight. Broadcaster Al Michaels said that he was able to read baseball box scores on a 27-inch (69\u00a0cm) television clearly from about 50 feet (15\u00a0m) away.[226] During the 2001 NBA Finals, Phil Jackson compared Jordan's dominance to Shaquille O'Neal, stating: \"Michael would get fouled on every play and still have to play through it and just clear himself for shots instead and would rise to that occasion.\"[227]LegacyThis article is part of a series aboutMichael JordanCareerCareer achievementsThe ShotGame 6 of the 1998 NBA Finals1982 NCAA Championship GameAir Jordan (Jumpman)Jordan RulesFamilyJames R. Jordan Sr. (father)Jeffrey Jordan (son)Marcus Jordan (son)Yvette Prieto (wife)BooksThe Jordan Rules (1992)When Nothing Else Matters (2004)Film and televisionProStars (1991)Space Jam (1996)Michael Jordan: An American Hero (1999)Michael Jordan to the Max (2000)Like Mike (2002)Like Mike 2: Streetball (2006)The Last Dance (2020)Air (2023)Video gamesJordan vs. Bird: One on One (1988)Michael Jordan in Flight (1993)Michael Jordan: Chaos in the Windy City (1994)Space Jam (1996)NBA 2K11 (2010)NBA 2K12 (2011)NBA 2K16 (2015)NBA 2K23 (2022)OtherStatue of Michael JordanMichael Jordan's RestaurantMichael Jordan's SteakhouseMichael Jackson's \"Jam\" (1992)\"Be Like Mike\" (1992)\"Second Generation\" (2006)Buckethead's \"Jordan\" (2009)Crying Jordan23XI RacingvteJordan's talent was clear from his first NBA season; by November 1984, he was being compared to Julius Erving.[60][62] Larry Bird said that rookie Jordan was the best player he ever saw, and that he was \"one of a kind\", and comparable to Wayne Gretzky as an athlete.[228] In his first game in Madison Square Garden against the New York Knicks, Jordan received a near minute-long standing ovation.[62] After establishing the single game playoff record of 63 points against the Boston Celtics on April 20, 1986, Bird described him as \"God disguised as Michael Jordan\".[75]Jordan led the NBA in scoring in 10 seasons (NBA record) and tied Wilt Chamberlain's record of seven consecutive scoring titles.[5] He was a fixture of the NBA All-Defensive First Team, making the roster nine times (NBA record shared with Gary Payton, Kevin Garnett, and Kobe Bryant).[229] Jordan also holds the top career regular season and playoff scoring averages of 30.1 and 33.4 ppg, respectively.[16][230] By 1998, the season of his Finals-winning shot against the Jazz, he was well known throughout the league as a clutch performer. In the regular season, Jordan was the Bulls' primary threat in the final seconds of a close game and in the playoffs; he would always ask for the ball at crunch time.[231] Jordan's total of 5,987 points in the playoffs is the second-highest among NBA career playoff scoring leaders.[232] He scored 32,292 points in the regular season,[233] placing him fifth on the NBA all-time scoring list behind LeBron James, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, Karl Malone, and Bryant.[233]With five regular season MVPs (tied for second place with Bill Russell\u2014only Abdul-Jabbar has won more, with six), six Finals MVPs (NBA record), and three NBA All-Star Game MVPs, Jordan is the most decorated player in NBA history.[13][234] Jordan finished among the top three in regular season MVP voting 10 times.[13] He was named one of the 50 Greatest Players in NBA History in 1996,[235] and selected to the NBA 75th Anniversary Team in 2021.[23] Jordan is one of only seven players in history to win an NCAA championship, an NBA championship, and an Olympic gold medal (doing so twice with the 1984 and 1992 U.S. men's basketball teams).[236] Since 1976, the year of the ABA\u2013NBA merger,[237] Jordan and Pippen are the only two players to win six NBA Finals playing for one team.[238] In the All-Star Game fan ballot, Jordan received the most votes nine times, more than any other player.[239]\"There's Michael Jordan and then there is the rest of us.\"\u2014Magic Johnson[5]Many of Jordan's contemporaries have said that Jordan is the greatest basketball player of all time.[224] In 1999, an ESPN survey of journalists, athletes and other sports figures ranked Jordan the greatest North American athlete of the 20th century.[240] Jordan placed second to Babe Ruth in the Associated Press' December 1999 list of 20th century athletes.[241] In addition, the Associated Press voted him the greatest basketball player of the 20th century.[242] Jordan has also appeared on the front cover of Sports Illustrated a record 50 times.[243] In the September 1996 issue of Sport, which was the publication's 50th-anniversary issue, Jordan was named the greatest athlete of the past 50 years.[244]Jordan's athletic leaping ability, highlighted in his back-to-back Slam Dunk Contest championships in 1987 and 1988, is credited by many people with having influenced a generation of young players.[245][246] Several NBA players, including James and Dwyane Wade, have stated that they considered Jordan their role model while they were growing up.[247][248] In addition, commentators have dubbed a number of next-generation players \"the next Michael Jordan\" upon their entry to the NBA, including Penny Hardaway, Grant Hill, Allen Iverson, Bryant, Vince Carter, James, and Wade.[249][250][251] Some analysts, such as The Ringer's Dan Devine, drew parallels between Jordan's experiment at point guard in the 1988\u201389 season and the modern NBA; for Devine, it \"inadvertently foreshadowed the modern game's stylistic shift toward monster-usage primary playmakers\", such as Russell Westbrook, James Harden, Luka Don\u010di\u0107, and James.[252] Don Nelson stated: \"I would've been playing him at point guard the day he showed up as a rookie.\"[253]Although Jordan was a well-rounded player, his \"Air Jordan\" image is also often credited with inadvertently decreasing the jump shooting skills, defense, and fundamentals of young players,[245] a fact Jordan himself has lamented, saying: \"I think it was the exposure of Michael Jordan; the marketing of Michael Jordan. Everything was marketed towards the things that people wanted to see, which was scoring and dunking. That Michael Jordan still played defense and an all-around game, but it was never really publicized.\"[245] During his heyday, Jordan did much to increase the status of the game; television ratings increased only during his time in the league.[254] The popularity of the NBA in the U.S. declined after his last title.[254] As late as 2022, NBA Finals television ratings had not returned to the level reached during his last championship-winning season.[255]In August 2009, the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in Springfield, Massachusetts, opened a Michael Jordan exhibit that contained items from his college and NBA careers as well as from the 1992 \"Dream Team\"; the exhibit also has a batting baseball glove to signify Jordan's short career in the Minor League Baseball.[256] After Jordan received word of his acceptance into the Hall of Fame, he selected Class of 1996 member David Thompson to present him.[257] As Jordan would later explain during his induction speech in September 2009, he was not a fan of the Tar Heels when growing up in North Carolina but greatly admired Thompson, who played for the rival NC State Wolfpack. In September, he was inducted into the Hall with several former Bulls teammates in attendance, including Scottie Pippen, Dennis Rodman, Charles Oakley, Ron Harper, Steve Kerr, and Toni Kuko\u010d.[17] Dean Smith and Doug Collins, two of Jordan's former coaches, were also among those present. His emotional reaction during his speech when he began to cry was captured by Associated Press photographer Stephan Savoia and would later go viral on social media as the \"Crying Jordan\" Internet meme.[258][259] In 2016, President Barack Obama honored Jordan with the Presidential Medal of Freedom.[27] In October 2021, Jordan was named to the NBA 75th Anniversary Team.[23] In September 2022, Jordan's jersey in which he played the opening game of the 1998 NBA Finals was sold for $10.1\u00a0million, making it the most expensive game-worn sports memorabilia in history.[260] In December 2022, the NBA unveiled a new MVP trophy, named in Jordan's honor, to be awarded beginning with the 2022\u201323 season, which replaced the original trophy, named in honor of former NBA commissioner Maurice Podoloff.[261][262]NBA career statisticsFurther information: List of career achievements by Michael Jordan \u00a7\u00a0NBA career statisticsSee also: List of career achievements by Michael Jordan \u00a7\u00a0College statisticsLegend\u00a0\u00a0GPGames played\u00a0\u00a0GS\u00a0Games started\u00a0MPG\u00a0Minutes per game\u00a0FG%\u00a0Field goal percentage\u00a03P%\u00a03-point field goal percentage\u00a0FT%\u00a0Free throw percentage\u00a0RPG\u00a0Rebounds per game\u00a0APG\u00a0Assists per game\u00a0SPG\u00a0Steals per game\u00a0BPG\u00a0Blocks per game\u00a0PPG\u00a0Points per game\u00a0Bold\u00a0Career high\u00a0\u2020\u00a0Won an NBA championship\u00a0*\u00a0Led the league\u00a0\u2021\u00a0NBA recordRegular seasonYearTeamGPGSMPGFG%3P%FT%RPGAPGSPGBPGPPG1984\u201385Chicago82*82*38.3.515.173.8456.55.92.4.828.21985\u201386Chicago18725.1.457.167.8403.62.92.11.222.71986\u201387Chicago82*82*40.0.482.182.8575.24.62.91.537.1*1987\u201388Chicago8282*40.4*.535.132.8415.55.93.2*1.635.0*1988\u201389Chicago818140.2*.538.276.8508.08.02.9.832.5*1989\u201390Chicago82*82*39.0.526.376.8486.96.32.8*.733.6*1990\u201391\u2020Chicago82*82*37.0.539.312.8516.05.52.71.031.5*1991\u201392\u2020Chicago808038.8.519.270.8326.46.12.3.930.1*1992\u201393\u2020Chicago787839.3.495.352.8376.75.52.8*.832.6*1994\u201395Chicago171739.3.411.500.8016.95.31.8.826.91995\u201396\u2020Chicago8282*37.7.495.427.8346.64.32.2.530.4*1996\u201397\u2020Chicago8282*37.9.486.374.8335.94.31.7.529.6*1997\u201398\u2020Chicago82*82*38.8.465.238.7845.83.51.7.528.7*2001\u201302Wash\u00adington605334.9.416.189.7905.75.21.4.422.92002\u201303Wash\u00adington826737.0.445.291.8216.13.81.5.520.0Career[13]1,0721,03938.3.497.327.8356.25.32.3.830.1\u2021All-Star[13]131329.4.472.273.7504.74.22.8.520.2PlayoffsYearTeamGPGSMPGFG%3P%FT%RPGAPGSPGBPGPPG1985Chicago4442.8.436.125.8285.88.52.81.029.31986Chicago3345.0.5051.000.8726.35.72.31.343.7\u20211987Chicago3342.7.417.400.8977.06.02.02.335.71988Chicago101042.7.531.333.8697.14.72.41.136.31989Chicago171742.2.510.286.7997.07.62.5.834.81990Chicago161642.1.514.320.8367.26.82.8.936.71991\u2020Chicago171740.5.524.385.8456.48.42.41.431.11992\u2020Chicago222241.8.499.386.8576.25.82.0.734.51993\u2020Chicago191941.2.475.389.8056.76.02.1.935.11995Chicago101042.0.484.367.8106.54.52.31.431.51996\u2020Chicago181840.7.459.403.8184.94.11.8.330.71997\u2020Chicago191942.3.456.194.8317.94.81.6.931.11998\u2020Chicago212141.5.462.302.8125.13.51.5.632.4Career[13][263]17917941.8.487.332.8286.45.72.1.833.4\u2021Awards and honorsFurther information: List of career achievements by Michael JordanJames Worthy, Jordan, and Dean Smith in 2007 at a North Carolina Tar Heels men's basketball game honoring the 1957 and 1982 men's basketball teamsNBASix-time NBA champion \u2013 1991, 1992, 1993, 1996, 1997, 1998[5]Six-time NBA Finals MVP \u2013 1991, 1992, 1993, 1996, 1997, 1998[13]Five-time NBA MVP \u2013 1988, 1991, 1992, 1996, 1998[5]NBA Defensive Player of the Year \u2013 1987\u201388[264]NBA Rookie of the Year \u2013 1984\u201385[5]10-time NBA scoring leader \u2013 1987\u20131993, 1996\u20131998[13]Three-time NBA steals leader \u2013 1988, 1990, 1993[13]14-time NBA All-Star \u2013 1985\u20131993, 1996\u20131998, 2002, 2003[13]Three-time NBA All-Star Game MVP \u2013 1988, 1996, 1998[13]10-time All-NBA First Team \u2013 1987\u20131993, 1996\u20131998[5]One-time All-NBA Second Team \u2013 1985[5]Nine-time NBA All-Defensive First Team \u2013 1988\u20131993, 1996\u20131998[5]NBA All-Rookie First Team \u2013 1985[13]Two-time NBA Slam Dunk Contest champion \u2013 1987, 1988[5]Two-time IBM Award winner \u2013 1985, 1989[264]Named one of the 50 Greatest Players in NBA History in 1996[5]Selected on the NBA 75th Anniversary Team in 2021[23]No. 23 retired by the Chicago Bulls[265]No. 23 retired by the Miami Heat[265]Chicago Bulls Ring of Honor[266]NBA MVP trophy renamed in Jordan's honor (\"Michael Jordan Trophy\") in 2022[262]USA BasketballTwo-time Olympic gold medal winner \u2013 1984, 1992[5]Tournament of the Americas gold medal winner \u2013 1992[267]Pan American Games gold medal winner \u2013 1983[268]Two-time USA Basketball Male Athlete of the Year \u2013 1983, 1984NCAANCAA national championship \u2013 1981\u201382[264]ACC Rookie of the Year \u2013 1981\u201382[269]Two-time Consensus NCAA All-American First Team \u2013 1982\u201383, 1983\u201384[269]ACC Men's Basketball Player of the Year \u2013 1983\u201384[269]ACC Athlete of the Year \u2013 1984[270]USBWA College Player of the Year \u2013 1983\u201384[271]Naismith College Player of the Year \u2013 1983\u201384[5]Adolph Rupp Trophy \u2013 1983\u201384[272]John R. Wooden Award \u2013 1983\u201384[5]Two-time Sporting News National Player of  the Year (1983, 1984)[273]No. 23 retired by the North Carolina Tar Heels[274]High schoolMcDonald's All-American \u2013 1981[37]Parade All-American First Team \u2013 1981[275]Halls of FameTwo-time Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame inductee:Class of 2009 \u2013 individual[17]Class of 2010 \u2013 as a member of the \"Dream Team\"[18]United States Olympic Hall of Fame \u2013 Class of 2009 (as a member of the \"Dream Team\")[19]North Carolina Sports Hall of Fame \u2013 Class of 2010[20]Two-time FIBA Hall of Fame inductee:Class of 2015 \u2013 individual[21]Class of 2017 \u2013 as a member of the \"Dream Team\"[22]MediaThree-time Associated Press Athlete of the Year \u2013 1991, 1992, 1993[276]Sports Illustrated Sportsperson of the Year \u2013 1991[277]Ranked No. 1 by Slam magazine's \"Top 50 Players of All-Time\"[278]Ranked No. 1 by ESPN SportsCentury's \"Top North American Athletes of the 20th Century\"[240]10-time ESPY Award winner (in various categories)[279]1997 Marca Leyenda winner[280]National2016 Presidential Medal of Freedom[27]State/localStatue inside the United Center[281]Section of Madison Street in Chicago renamed Michael Jordan Drive \u2013 1994[282]Post-retirementJordan on a golf course in 2007After his third retirement, Jordan assumed that he would be able to return to his front office position as Director of Basketball Operations with the Wizards.[283] His previous tenure had produced mixed results and may have also influenced the trade of Richard \"Rip\" Hamilton for Jerry Stackhouse, although Jordan was not technically Director of Basketball Operations in 2002.[171] On May 7, 2003, Wizards owner Abe Pollin fired Jordan from the role.[171] Jordan later stated that he felt betrayed, and that if he had known he would be fired upon retiring, he never would have come back to play for the Wizards.[112]Over the next few years Jordan played golf in celebrity charity tournaments and spent time with his family in Chicago. He also promoted his Jordan Brand clothing line and rode motorcycles.[284] Since 2004, Jordan has owned Michael Jordan Motorsports, a professional closed-course motorcycle road racing team that competed with two Suzukis in the premier Superbike championship sanctioned by the American Motorcyclist Association (AMA) until the end of the 2013 season.[285][286]Charlotte Bobcats/HornetsOn June 15, 2006, Jordan bought a minority stake in the Charlotte Bobcats (known as the Hornets since 2013), becoming the team's second-largest shareholder behind majority owner Robert L. Johnson. As part of the deal, Jordan took full control over the basketball side of the operation, with the title Managing Member of Basketball Operations.[287][288] Despite Jordan's previous success as an endorser, he had made an effort not to be included in Charlotte's marketing campaigns.[289] A decade earlier, Jordan had made a bid to become part-owner of Charlotte's original NBA team, the Charlotte Hornets, but talks collapsed when owner George Shinn refused to give Jordan complete control of basketball operations.[290]In February 2010, it was reported that Jordan was seeking majority ownership of the Bobcats.[291] As February wore on, it became apparent that Jordan and former Houston Rockets president George Postolos were the leading contenders for ownership of the team. On February 27, the Bobcats announced that Johnson had reached an agreement with Jordan and his group, MJ Basketball Holdings, to buy the team from Johnson pending NBA approval.[292] On March 17, the NBA Board of Governors unanimously approved Jordan's purchase, making him the first former player to become the majority owner of an NBA team,[293] and the league's only African-American majority owner.[294]During the 2011 NBA lockout, The New York Times wrote that Jordan led a group of 10 to 14 hardline owners who wanted to cap the players' share of basketball-related income at 50 percent and as low as 47. Journalists observed that, during the labor dispute in 1998, Jordan had told Washington Wizards then-owner Abe Pollin: \"If you can't make a profit, you should sell your team.\"[295] Jason Whitlock of FoxSports.com called Jordan \"a hypocrite sellout who can easily betray the very people who made him a billionaire global icon\" for wanting \"current players to pay for his incompetence\".[296] He cited Jordan's executive decisions to draft disappointing players Kwame Brown and Adam Morrison.[296]During the 2011\u201312 NBA season that was shortened to 66 games by the lockout, the Bobcats posted a 7\u201359 record. The team closed out the season with a 23-game losing streak; their .106 winning percentage was the worst in NBA history.[297] Before the next season, Jordan said: \"I'm not real happy about the record book scenario last year. It's very, very frustrating.\"[298]During the 2019 NBA offseason, Jordan sold a minority piece of the Hornets to Gabe Plotkin and Daniel Sundheim, retaining the majority for himself,[299] as well as the role of chairman.[300] In 2023, Jordan finalized the sale of his majority stake to Gabe Plotkin and Rick Schnall, ending his 13-year tenure as majority owner, although he kept a minority stake.[301] The sale was officially completed in August 2023 for approximately $3\u00a0billion, more than 10 times the $275\u00a0million Jordan had paid for the team.[302]23XI RacingOn September 21, 2020, Jordan and NASCAR driver Denny Hamlin announced they would be fielding a NASCAR Cup Series team with Bubba Wallace driving, beginning competition in the 2021 season.[303] On October 22, the team's name was confirmed to be 23XI Racing (pronounced twenty-three eleven) and the team's entry would bear No. 23.[304] After the team's inaugural season, it added a second car with No. 45, driven by Kurt Busch in 2022 and Tyler Reddick in 2023.[305][306] Ty Gibbs, John Hunter Nemechek, and Daniel Hemric also drove for 23XI as substitute drivers during the 2022 season.[307][308][309] The team fielded a third car, No. 67, driven by Travis Pastrana in the 2023 Daytona 500.[310] 23XI Racing has won six races, two by Wallace, three by Reddick, and one by Busch.[311][312][313]Personal lifeJordan receiving the Presidential Medal of Freedom from President Barack Obama at the White HouseJordan's nephew through his brother Larry, Justin Jordan, played NCAA Division I basketball for the UNC Greensboro Spartans and is a scout for the Charlotte Hornets.[314][315]Jordan married Juanita Vanoy at A Little White Wedding Chapel in Las Vegas on September 2, 1989.[316][317] They had two sons, Jeffrey and Marcus, and a daughter, Jasmine.[318] The Jordans filed for divorce on January 4, 2002, citing irreconcilable differences, but reconciled shortly thereafter. They again filed for divorce and were granted a final decree of dissolution of marriage on December 29, 2006, commenting that the decision was made \"mutually and amicably\".[319][320] It is reported that Juanita received a $168\u00a0million settlement (equivalent to $254 million in 2023), making it the largest celebrity divorce settlement on public record at the time.[321][322]In 1991, Jordan purchased a lot in Highland Park, Illinois, where he planned to build a 56,000-square-foot (5,200\u00a0m2) mansion. It was completed in 1995. He listed the mansion for sale in 2012.[323] He also owns homes in North Carolina and Jupiter Island, Florida.[324]On July 21, 2006, a judge in Cook County, Illinois, determined that Jordan did not owe his alleged former lover Karla Knafel $5\u00a0million in a breach of contract claim.[325] Jordan had allegedly paid Knafel $250,000 to keep their relationship a secret.[326][327][328] Knafel claimed Jordan promised her $5\u00a0million for remaining silent and agreeing not to file a paternity suit after Knafel learned she was pregnant in 1991; a DNA test showed Jordan was not the father of the child.[325]Jordan proposed to his longtime girlfriend, Cuban-American model Yvette Prieto, on Christmas 2011,[329] and they were married on April 27, 2013, at Bethesda-by-the-Sea Episcopal Church.[330][331] It was announced on November 30, 2013, that the two were expecting their first child together.[332][333] On February 11, 2014, Prieto gave birth to identical twin daughters named Victoria and Ysabel.[334] In 2019, Jordan became a grandfather when his daughter Jasmine gave birth to a son, whose father is professional basketball player Rakeem Christmas.[335]Media figure and business interestsEndorsementsJordan in 2008Jordan is one of the most marketed sports figures in history. He has been a major spokesman for such brands as Nike, Coca-Cola, Chevrolet, Gatorade, McDonald's, Ball Park Franks, Rayovac, Wheaties, Hanes, and MCI.[336] Jordan has had a long relationship with Gatorade, appearing in over 20 commercials for the company since 1991, including the \"Be Like Mike\" commercials in which a song was sung by children wishing to be like Jordan.[336][337]Nike created a signature shoe for Jordan, called the Air Jordan, in 1984.[338] One of Jordan's more popular commercials for the shoe involved Spike Lee playing the part of Mars Blackmon. In the commercials, Lee, as Blackmon, attempted to find the source of Jordan's abilities and became convinced that \"it's gotta be the shoes\".[336] The hype and demand for the shoes even brought on a spate of \"shoe-jackings\", in which people were robbed of their sneakers at gunpoint. Subsequently, Nike spun off the Jordan line into its own division named the \"Jordan Brand\". The company features a list of athletes and celebrities as endorsers.[339][340] The brand has also sponsored college sports programs such as those of North Carolina, UCLA, California, Oklahoma, Florida, Georgetown, and Marquette.[341][342]Jordan also has been associated with the Looney Tunes cartoon characters. A Nike commercial shown during 1992's Super Bowl XXVI featured Jordan and Bugs Bunny playing basketball.[343] The Super Bowl commercial inspired the 1996 live action/animated film Space Jam, which starred Jordan and Bugs in a fictional story set during the former's first retirement from basketball.[344] They have subsequently appeared together in several commercials for MCI.[344] Jordan also made an appearance in the music video for Michael Jackson's \"Jam\" (1992).[345]Since 2008, Jordan's yearly income from endorsements is estimated to be over $40 million.[346][347] In addition, when Jordan's power at the ticket gates was at its highest point, the Bulls regularly sold out both their home and road games.[348] Due to this, Jordan set records in player salary by signing annual contracts worth in excess of US$30\u00a0million per season.[349] An academic study found that Jordan's first NBA comeback resulted in an increase in the market capitalization of his client firms of more than $1\u00a0billion.[350]Most of Jordan's endorsement deals, including his first deal with Nike, were engineered by his agent, David Falk.[351] Jordan has described Falk as \"the best at what he does\" and that \"marketing-wise, he's great. He's the one who came up with the concept of 'Air Jordan'.\"[352]Business venturesIn June 2010, Jordan was ranked by Forbes as the 20th-most-powerful celebrity in the world, with $55\u00a0million earned between June 2009 and June 2010. According to Forbes, Jordan Brand generates $1\u00a0billion in sales for Nike.[353] In June 2014, Jordan was named the first NBA player to become a billionaire, after he increased his stake in the Charlotte Hornets from 80% to 89.5%.[354][355] On January 20, 2015, Jordan was honored with the Charlotte Business Journal's Business Person of the Year for 2014.[356] In 2017, he became a part owner of the Miami Marlins of Major League Baseball.[357]Forbes designated Jordan as the athlete with the highest career earnings in 2017.[358] From his Jordan Brand income and endorsements, Jordan's 2015 income was an estimated $110\u00a0million, the most of any retired athlete.[359] As of 2024[update], his net worth is estimated at $3.2\u00a0billion by Forbes,[28] making him the fifth-richest African-American, behind Robert F. Smith, David Steward, Oprah Winfrey, and Rihanna.[360]Jordan co-owns an automotive group which bears his name. The company has a Nissan dealership in Durham, North Carolina, acquired in 1990,[361] and formerly had a Lincoln\u2013Mercury dealership from 1995 until its closure in June 2009.[362][363] The company also owned a Nissan franchise in Glen Burnie, Maryland.[362] The restaurant industry is another business interest of Jordan's. Restaurants he has owned include a steakhouse in New York City's Grand Central Terminal, among others;[364] that restaurant closed in 2018.[365] Jordan is the majority investor in a golf course, Grove XXIII in Hobe Sound, Florida.[366]In September 2020, Jordan became an investor and advisor for DraftKings.[367]PhilanthropyFrom 2001 to 2014, Jordan hosted an annual golf tournament, the Michael Jordan Celebrity Invitational, that raised money for various charities.[368] In 2006, Jordan and his wife Juanita pledged $5\u00a0million to Chicago's Hales Franciscan High School.[369] The Jordan Brand has made donations to Habitat for Humanity and a Louisiana branch of the Boys & Girls Clubs of America.[370]The Make-A-Wish Foundation named Jordan its Chief Wish Ambassador in 2008.[368] In 2013, he granted his 200th wish for the organization.[371] As of 2019, he has raised more than $5\u00a0million for the Make-A-Wish Foundation.[368] In 2023, Jordan donated $10 million to the organization for his 60th birthday.[372]In 2015, Jordan donated a settlement of undisclosed size from a lawsuit against supermarkets that had used his name without permission to 23 different Chicago charities.[373] In 2017, Jordan funded two Novant Health Michael Jordan Family Clinics in Charlotte, North Carolina, by giving $7\u00a0million, the biggest donation he had made at the time.[374] In 2018, after Hurricane Florence damaged parts of North Carolina, including his former hometown of Wilmington, Jordan donated $2\u00a0million to relief efforts.[375] He gave $1\u00a0million to aid the Bahamas' recovery following Hurricane Dorian in 2019.[376]On June 5, 2020, in the wake of the protests following the murder of George Floyd, Jordan and his brand announced in a joint statement that they would be donating $100\u00a0million over the next 10 years to organizations dedicated to \"ensuring racial equality, social justice and greater access to education\".[377] In February 2021, Jordan funded two Novant Health Michael Jordan Family Clinics in New Hanover County, North Carolina, by giving $10\u00a0million.[378][379]Film and televisionJordan played himself in the 1996 comedy film Space Jam. The film received mixed reviews,[380] but it was a box office success, making $230\u00a0million worldwide, and earned more than $1\u00a0billion through merchandise sales.[381]In 2000, Jordan was the subject of an IMAX documentary about his career with the Chicago Bulls, especially the 1998 NBA playoffs, titled Michael Jordan to the Max.[382] Two decades later, the same period of Jordan's life was covered in much greater and more personal detail by the Emmy Award-winning The Last Dance, a 10-part TV documentary which debuted on ESPN in April and May 2020. The Last Dance relied heavily on about 500 hours of candid film of Jordan's and his teammates' off-court activities which an NBA Entertainment crew had shot over the course of the 1997\u201398 NBA season for use in a documentary. The project was delayed for many years because Jordan had not yet given his permission for the footage to be used.[383][384] He was interviewed at three homes associated with the production and did not want cameras in his home or on his plane, as according to director Jason Hehir \"there are certain aspects of his life that he wants to keep private\".[385]Jordan granted rapper Travis Scott permission to film a music video for his single \"Franchise\" at his home in Highland Park, Illinois.[386] Jordan appeared in the 2022 miniseries The Captain, which follows the life and career of Derek Jeter.[387]BooksJordan has authored several books focusing on his life, basketball career, and world view.Rare Air: Michael on Michael, with Mark Vancil and Walter Iooss (Harper San Francisco, 1993).[388][389]I Can't Accept Not Trying: Michael Jordan on the Pursuit of Excellence, with Mark Vancil and Sandro Miller (Harper San Francisco, 1994).[390]For the Love of the Game: My Story, with Mark Vancil (Crown Publishers, 1998).[391]Driven from Within, with Mark Vancil (Atria Books, 2005).[392]See alsoForbes' list of the world's highest-paid athletesList of athletes who came out of retirementList of NBA teams by single season win percentageMichael Jordan's RestaurantMichael Jordan: Chaos in the Windy CityMichael Jordan in FlightNBA 2K11NBA 2K12Notes^ Jordan's weight fluctuated from 195 to 218\u00a0lb (88 to 99\u00a0kg) during the course of his professional career;[1][2][3] his NBA listed weight was 216\u00a0lb (98\u00a0kg).[4][5][6]^ Jordan wore a nameless No. 12 jersey in a February 14, 1990, game against the Orlando Magic because his No. 23 jersey had been stolen.[7] Jordan scored 49 points, setting a franchise record for players wearing that jersey number.[8]References^ Telander, Rick (February 14, 2018). \"Michael Jordan Put on a Helluva Show at '88 All-Star Weekend\". Slam. Archived from the original on January 2, 2021. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Quinn, Sam (May 11, 2020). \"How Michael Jordan bulked up to outmuscle Pistons, win first NBA championship with Bulls\". CBS Sports. Archived from the original on July 16, 2020. Retrieved November 21, 2020.^ a b Thompson, Wright (February 22, 2013). \"Michael Jordan Has Not Left the Building\". Archived March 7, 2020, at the Wayback Machine. ESPN The Magazine. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"Michael Jordan Info Page\". NBA. Archived from the original on June 15, 2010. Retrieved November 21, 2020.^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab \"Michael Jordan Bio\". NBA. Archived from the original on September 2, 2006. Retrieved November 21, 2020.^ \"Chicago Bulls: Historical\" (PDF). NBA. p.\u00a0362. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 26, 2012. Retrieved January 17, 2021.^ Strauss, Chris (December 12, 2012). \"The greatest No. 12 that no one is talking about\". Archived October 8, 2022, at the Wayback Machine. USA Today. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Smith, Sam (February 15, 1990). \"Magic has the Bulls' number: Catledge leads rally; Jordan scores 49 points\", Chicago Tribune, p. A1.^ Rein, Kotler and Shields, p. 173.^ a b Markovits and Rensman, p. 89.^ \"The NBA's 75th Anniversary Team, ranked: Where 76 basketball legends check in on our list\". ESPN.com. February 21, 2022. Archived from the original on April 25, 2022. Retrieved October 30, 2023. Jordan is widely regarded as the greatest basketball player of all time \u2013 he changed so many different facets of the league \u2013 but maybe most of all, he showed players they could grow themselves into a global brand on and off the floor with stellar play and the right marketing machine behind it all.^ \"Legends profile: Michael Jordan\". NBA.com. September 14, 2021. Archived from the original on August 8, 2022. Retrieved August 8, 2022.^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w \"Michael Jordan Stats\". Basketball Reference. Archived from the original on November 21, 2020. Retrieved November 21, 2020.^ Berkow, Ira (June 15, 1991). \"Sports of The Times; Air Jordan And Just Plain Folks\". Archived April 4, 2019, at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ a b \"American NBA players who never lost with Team USA: Jordan is second\". Marca. August 9, 2021. Archived from the original on August 10, 2021. Retrieved October 1, 2022.^ a b Weinstein, Brad, ed. (2019). 2019\u201320 Official NBA Guide (PDF). NBA Properties. pp.\u00a0182, 199. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 12, 2022. Retrieved February 4, 2023.^ a b c Smith, Sam (September 12, 2009). \"Jordan makes a Hall of Fame address\". Archived December 2, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. NBA.com. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ a b Associated Press (August 14, 2010). \"Scottie Pippen, Karl Malone enter Hall\". Archived December 12, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. ESPN. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ a b \"Dream Team Celebrates 25th Anniversary Of Golden Olympic Run\". USA Basketball, July 26, 2017. Retrieved September 17, 2023.^ a b Associated Press (December 1, 2010). \"Jordan to be inducted in NC Sports Hall of Fame\". Archived April 21, 2020, at the Wayback Machine. Newsday. Retrieved August 3, 2023.^ a b \"Michael Jordan to be inducted into FIBA Hall of Fame\". Archived November 8, 2020, at the Wayback Machine. ESPN. July 17, 2015. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ a b \"2017 Class of FIBA Hall of Fame: Dream Team\". FIBA. Archived from the original on April 15, 2022. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ a b c d \"Michael Jordan\". NBA. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved June 30, 2023.^ \"Michael Jordan: A Global Icon\". Faze. Archived from the original on February 23, 2022. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Skidmore, Sarah (January 10, 2008). \"23 years later, Air Jordans maintain mystique\". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on February 16, 2008. Retrieved February 7, 2021.^ Davis, Adam (March 7, 2016). \"Michael Jordan Becomes First Billionaire NBA Player\". Archived October 16, 2021, at the Wayback Machine. Fox Business. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ a b c \"President Obama Names Recipients of the Presidential Medal of Freedom\". Archived January 18, 2017, at the Wayback Machine. The White House. November 16, 2016. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ a b \"Michael Jordan\". Forbes. Retrieved April 22, 2024.^ a b Morrissey, Rick (September 10, 2009). \"Chapter 1: Brooklyn\". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on April 21, 2020. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Halberstam, p. 17.^ Galloway, Paul (April 7, 1999). \"Mrs. Jordan's Rules\". Archived April 22, 2020, at the Wayback Machine. Chicago Tribune. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Isaacson, Melissa (September 9, 2009). \"Portrait of a legend\". Archived April 21, 2020, at the Wayback Machine. ESPN. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Lazenby, p. 43.^ a b Halberstam, pp. 20\u201321.^ a b Poppel, Seth (October 17, 2015). \"Michael Jordan Didn't Make Varsity\u2014At First\". Newsweek. Archived from the original on June 25, 2017. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ a b c \"Michael Jordan \u2013 High School, Amateur, and Exhibition Stats\". Basketball Reference. Archived from the original on January 17, 2021. Retrieved January 17, 2021.^ a b Williams, Lena (December 7, 2001). \"Plus: Basketball; 'A McDonald's Game For Girls, Too'\". Archived January 22, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Lazenby, pp. 146\u2013147.^ Porter, p. 8.^ a b Lazenby, p. 141.^ Foreman, Tom Jr. (March 19, 1981). \"Alphelia Jenkins Makes All-State\". Rocky Mount Telegram. Associated Press. p.\u00a014. Archived from the original on February 10, 2024. Retrieved February 3, 2019 \u2013 via Newspapers.com.^ Buchalter, Bill (April 19, 1981). \"14th All-Southern team grows taller, gets better\". Sentinel Star. p.\u00a08C. Archived from the original on February 10, 2024. Retrieved February 3, 2019 \u2013 via Newspapers.com.^ Halberstam, pp. 67\u201368.^ LaFeber, p. 32.^ Ricks, William E. (February 17, 2023). \"'His Airness': Fun facts about Michael Jordan\". ESPN. Archived from the original on January 9, 2024. Retrieved January 23, 2024.^ \"Michael Jordan reveals he wanted to be a weatherman if he didn't make it in basketball\". Fox Sports. August 10, 2015. Archived from the original on January 9, 2024. Retrieved January 23, 2024.^ a b c d e f g h i j k l \"Michael Jordan\". Database Basketball. Archived from the original on February 22, 2009. Retrieved July 9, 2019.^ Hoffman, Benjamin (February 22, 2014). \"Jordan Keeps Haunting Knicks' Playoff Hopes\". Archived February 23, 2022, at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Lazenby, Roland (1999). \"Michaelangelo: Portrait of a Champion\". Michael Jordan: The Ultimate Career Tribute. Bannockburn, Illinois: H&S Media. p. 128.^ \"Michael Jordan says his title-winning shot in 1982 was 'the birth of Michael Jordan'\". ESPN.com. April 4, 2016. Archived from the original on November 19, 2020. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"Michael Jordan Carolina Basketball Facts\". North Carolina Tar Heels. Archived from the original on February 12, 2022. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"Michael Jordan\". Sports Reference. Archived from the original on October 7, 2014. Retrieved October 22, 2022.^ Morris, Mike (1999). \"The Legend: A Highlight-Reel History of the NBA's Greatest Player\". Michael Jordan: The Ultimate Career Tribute. Bannockburn, Illinois: H&S Media. pp. 63, 67.^ Fogel, Anna (January 10, 2014). \"Michael Jordan's College Transcript Reveals He Took Beginning Tennis, Majored in Geography\". Archived July 14, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. New England Sports Network. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"ACC 50th Anniversary Men's Basketball Team\". Atlantic Coast Conference. September 29, 2007. Archived from the original on September 29, 2007. Retrieved July 21, 2021.^ DuPree, David (November 26, 1984). \"Trail Blazers don't regret bypassing Jordan\". USA Today. p.\u00a06C.^ Sakamoto, Bob (November 25, 1984). \"Portland GM is happy with Bowie\". Chicago Tribune. p.\u00a0B2.^ Schoenfield, David. \"The 100 worst draft picks ever\". ESPN. Archived from the original on July 8, 2017. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Hajducky, Dan (December 17, 2021). \"Ticket stub from Michael Jordan's NBA debut sells for $264K, a record for a sports ticket\". ESPN. Archived from the original on December 17, 2021. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ a b Gross, Jane (October 21, 1984). \"Jordan Makes People Wonder: Is He the New Dr. J?\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 23, 2009. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Goldaper, Sam (October 19, 1984). \"Jordan dazzles crowd at Garden\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 22, 2009. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ a b c d Johnson, Roy S. (November 9, 1984). \"Jordan-Led Bulls Romp Before 19,252\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 10, 2009. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"A Star Is Born\". Sports Illustrated. December 10, 1984. Archived from the original on March 28, 2017. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"Chicago Bulls 1984\u201385 Game Log and Scores\". Database Basketball. Archived from the original on June 30, 2007. Retrieved June 9, 2017.^ a b c d e f g h i j \"Michael Jordan bio\". NBA.com. Archived from the original on January 9, 2007. Retrieved May 9, 2017.^ a b c d e f g h i j \"Chicago Bulls (1966 \u2013)\". Database Basketball. Archived from the original on October 14, 2007. Retrieved June 9, 2017.^ Maranzana, Silvio (August 26, 1985). \"Basket: Michael Jordan in passerella a Chiarbola\". Il Piccolo (in Italian). Trieste. p.\u00a011.^ Maranzana, Silvio (August 27, 1985). \"Michael Jordan incanta la platea triestina\". Il Piccolo (in Italian). Trieste. p.\u00a013.^ a b Vanetti, Flavio (May 21, 2020). \"Michael Jordan e l'Italia: quella volta che gioc\u00f2 a Trieste nel 1985 (e ruppe un tabellone con una schiacciata)\". Corriere della Sera (in Italian). Archived from the original on January 17, 2021. Retrieved January 17, 2021.^ Forester, Pete (September 30, 2016). \"These New Air Jordans Celebrate One of Basketball's Most Iconic Moments\". Esquire. Archived from the original on January 17, 2021. Retrieved January 17, 2021.^ \"Michael Jordan: Rare trainers fetch $615,000 at auction\". BBC. August 13, 2020. Archived from the original on January 17, 2021. Retrieved January 17, 2021.^ Sullivan, Rory (August 14, 2020). \"Michael Jordan's game-worn sneakers set new record, selling for $615,000\". CNN. Archived from the original on December 9, 2020. Retrieved January 17, 2021.^ Lazenby, p. 289.^ \"Worst Records of Playoff Teams\". The Sporting News. April 28, 1986. p. 46.^ a b c \"God Disguised as Michael Jordan\". NBA.com.  Archived April 4, 2019, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved May 22, 2021.^ \"Top 10 Teams in NBA History\". NBA.com. Archived from the original on May 2, 2013. Retrieved May 18, 2023.^ Porter, p. 34.^ \"NBA & ABA Single Season Leaders and Records for Points\". Archived April 29, 2013, at the Wayback Machine. Basketball-Reference. Retrieved October 22, 2022.^ \"Jordan Adds Most Valuable Player Award to Honors\". The Washington Post. May 25, 1988. Retrieved October 28, 2021.^ a b Adams, Micah (May 18, 2020). \"How many MVP awards should Michael Jordan have won?\". The Sporting News. Archived from the original on May 23, 2021. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ a b c d \"Michael Jordan statistics\". NBA.com. Archived December 12, 2012, at the Wayback Machine Retrieved June 26, 2022.^ \"1987\u201388 Chicago Bulls Roster and Stats\". Basketball-Reference. Archived from the original on May 15, 2022. Retrieved October 22, 2022.^ \"Chicago Bulls 1987\u201388 Game Log and Scores\". Database Basketball. Archived June 30, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved June 9, 2017.^ Halberstam, p. 235.^ a b Silva, Orlando (April 3, 2020). \"Michael Jordan's Point Guard Stats Were Amazing: 10 Triple-Doubles In 11 Games\". Fadeaway World. Archived from the original on May 23, 2021. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"1988\u201389 Chicago Bulls Roster and Stats\". Basketball Reference. Archived from the original on June 2, 2021. Retrieved October 22, 2022.^ \"Jordan Hits 'The Shot'\". NBA.com. Archived August 12, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved July 27, 2019.^ Halberstam, pp. 257\u2013260.^ Harper, Zach (April 9, 2015). \"Throwback Thursday: Michael Jordan's 69-point, 18-rebound game\". CBS Sports. Archived from the original on January 16, 2020. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"1989-90 Chicago Bulls Roster and Stats\". Basketball Reference. Archived from the original on June 3, 2021. Retrieved October 22, 2022.^ a b \"Chicago Bulls 1990\u201391 Game Log and Scores\". Database Basketball. Archived June 30, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved June 9, 2017.^ Brown, Clifton (May 28, 1991). \"Basketball; Bulls Brush Aside Pistons for Eastern Title\". Archived January 25, 2017, at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Wilbon, Michael (June 7, 1991). \"Great Shot! Jordan's Best Amazingly Goes One Better\". Archived November 4, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. The Washington Post. p. D01. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"1991 Finals stats\". NBA.com. Archived November 5, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved June 26, 2022.^ a b c d e f \"NBA Finals MVP Award Winners\". NBA.com. Archived August 12, 2017, at the Wayback Machine. October 23, 2020. Retrieved June 7, 2021.^ a b c Schwartz, Larry (2002). \"Michael Jordan transcends hoops\". Archived February 1, 2013, at the Wayback Machine. ESPN. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"On a Collision Course\". Archived March 6, 2017, at the Wayback Machine. Sports Illustrated. May 11, 1992. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"Jordan Blazes Away From Long Range\". NBA.com. Archived November 5, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved June 26, 2022.^ \"A Stroll Down Memory Lane\". NBA.com. Archived October 20, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved July 9, 2019.^ \"1992 NBA Finals Trail Blazers vs. Bulls\". Basketball Reference. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"1992\u201393 NBA Awards Voting\". Archived April 4, 2020, at the Wayback Machine. Basketball Reference. Retrieved October 22, 2022.^ Zillgitt, Jeff (September 19, 2020). \"LeBron James should have more than four MVPs, given his dominance\". USA Today. Archived from the original on October 3, 2022. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"Paxson's Trey Propels Bulls Into NBA History\". NBA.com. Archived October 25, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved June 26, 2022.^ \"Michael Jordan 1992\u201393 Game Log\". Basketball Reference. Archived from the original on April 10, 2021. Retrieved October 22, 2022.^ McCallum, Jack (October 18, 1993). \"'The Desire Isn't There'\". Archived August 18, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. Sports Illustrated. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Anderson, Dave (May 27, 1993). \"Sports of The Times; Jordan's Atlantic City Caper\". Archived February 18, 2013, at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Brubaker, Bill (August 1, 1993). \"Jordan's Gambling Undergoes Intense Scrutiny Again\". Archived September 30, 2019, at the Wayback Machine. The Washington Post. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Halberstam, p. 320.^ Vecsey, George (March 19, 1995). \"Who Thinks Jordan Can't Win It All\". The New York Times. ISSN\u00a00362-4331. Archived from the original on February 17, 2019. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Simmons, Bill (February 27, 2006). \"Not so Stern after all\". ESPN The Magazine. p.\u00a02. Archived from the original on February 17, 2019. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ a b Mitchell, Fred; Kaplan, David (August 23, 2010). \"No evidence Jordan banished from NBA for a year in early '90s for gambling\". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on August 25, 2010. Retrieved February 17, 2019.^ a b Schorn, Daniel (October 19, 2005). \"Michael Jordan Still Flying High\". Archived October 25, 2019, at the Wayback Machine. CBS News. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Berkow, Ira (April 11, 1994). \"A Humbled Jordan Learns New Truths\". Archived February 26, 2013, at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Martin, Andrew (January 4, 1996). \"'I Believe We Killed Jordan's Dad'\". Archived April 7, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. Chicago Tribune. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ a b Janofsky, Michael (August 16, 1993). \"Two Men Are Charged With Murder Of Jordan\". Archived February 11, 2017, at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Deb, Sopan (August 18, 2020). \"The Death of James Jordan: What We Know\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 6, 2021. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Walsh, Edward (January 14, 1998). \"On the City's West Side, Jordan's Legacy Is Hope\". Archived November 7, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. The Washington Post. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"Michael Jordan, family attend groundbreaking ceremony for James Jordan Center\". Jet. Vol.\u00a088, no.\u00a014. Johnson Publishing Company. August 14, 1995. pp.\u00a051\u201353. ISSN\u00a00021-5996. Retrieved April 7, 2022 \u2013 via Google Books.^ Jordan, p. 100.^ Rodgers, Ted; Thomsen, Ian (October 18, 1993). \"Europe loses a role model; Even in countries where basketball is a minor pursuit, Jordan's profile looms large \u2013 includes related article on Jordan's stature in Japan\". The Sporting News. Vol.\u00a0216, no.\u00a016. p.\u00a035. ISSN\u00a00038-805X.^ The Sporting News Official NBA Register 1994\u201395, p. 334.^ a b \"Michael Jordan Chronology\". CNN/Sports Illustrated. January 12, 1999. Archived May 18, 2001, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved May 9, 2017.^ \"Michael Jordan: A Tribute\". CNN/Sports Illustrated. Archived April 7, 2004, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved May 9, 2017.^ Araton, Harvey (March 10, 1995). \"Basketball; Jordan Keeping the Basketball World in Suspense. Archived January 14, 2022, at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Zillgitt, Jeff (May 11, 2020). \"Day 61 without sports: Revisiting Michael Jordan's baseball career with fresh eyes\". Archived December 10, 2020, at the Wayback Machine. USA Today. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Shaikin, Bill (May 10, 2020). \"That .202 hitter Michael Jordan was a better MLB prospect than, say, Tim Tebow\". Archived December 9, 2020, at the Wayback Machine. Los Angeles Times. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"1994 Birmingham Barons\". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on July 4, 2021. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"Michael Jordan Statue\". United Center. June 2013. Archived from the original on April 3, 2017. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Artner, Alan G. (November 2, 1994). \"Jordan Truly Larger Than Life: Sculpture Shows Spirit Of The Man, But Little More\". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on October 6, 2012. Retrieved April 27, 2022.^ \"Bye-bye, No. 23: Buzz went to see Michael Jordan's Chicago...\" Chicago Tribune. November 8, 1994. Archived from the original on August 12, 2012. Retrieved April 27, 2022.^ \"1993\u201394 Chicago Bulls Roster and Stats\". Basketball Reference. Archived from the original on September 14, 2008. Retrieved October 22, 2022.^ Taylor, Phil (March 20, 1995). \"What Goes Up ... Must Come Down, Or So It Seems\". Archived April 30, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. Sports Illustrated. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Lazenby, pp. 513\u2013515.^ Lazenby, pp. 511\u2013512.^ Collier, Jamal (May 10, 2020). \"'I'm back.' Everything you need to know about Michael Jordan's 1995 return to the Chicago Bulls\u2014and the famous 2-word fax that preceded it\". Archived March 23, 2021, at the Wayback Machine. Chicago Tribune. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ a b \"Michael Jordan returns to Bulls in overtime loss to Indiana Pacers \u2013 Chicago Bulls\". Jet. Vol.\u00a087, no.\u00a021. Johnson Publishing Company. April 3, 1995. pp.\u00a051\u201353. ISSN\u00a00021-5996. Retrieved April 7, 2022 \u2013 via Google Books.^ Hausman, Jerry A.; Leonard, Gregory K. (1997). \"Superstars in the National Basketball Association: Economic Value and Policy\". Journal of Labor Economics. 15 (4): 586\u2013624 [587]. doi:10.1086/209839.^ \"1994\u201395 Chicago Bulls Schedule and Results\". Basketball Reference. Archived from the original on May 12, 2022. Retrieved October 22, 2022.^ Lawrence, Mitch (September 10, 2001). \"Memories of MJ's first two acts\". Archived October 25, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. ESPN. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ a b Walks, Matt (May 7, 2015). \"Flashback: 20 years ago today, Anderson forces MJ back to No. 23\". ESPN. Archived from the original on May 9, 2015. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Heisler, Mark (May 12, 1995). \"NBA Fines Jordan for Shoes, Bulls for No. 23\". Archived October 5, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. Los Angeles Times. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"1994\u201395 Chicago Bulls Roster and Stats\". Basketball Reference. Archived from the original on June 3, 2021. Retrieved October 22, 2022.^ Kerr, Steve (August 20, 2003). The greatest team in history \u2013 day four: Chicago Bulls. Archived July 28, 2013, at the Wayback Machine. BBC. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ a b \"Chicago Bulls 1995\u201396 Game Log and Scores\". Database Basketball. Archived January 25, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved June 9, 2017.^ \"NBA Team Regular Season Records for Wins\". Archived June 4, 2021, at the Wayback Machine. Basketball Reference. Retrieved October 22, 2022.^ \"1995\u201396 Chicago Bulls\". NBA.com. Archived November 5, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved June 26, 2022.^ a b \"Chicago Bulls 1996\u201397 Game Log and Scores\". Database Basketball. Archived January 25, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved June 9, 2017.^ a b Burns, Marty (January 19, 1999). \"23 to remember\". CNN/Sports Illustrated. Archived January 4, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved May 9, 2017.^ Armour, Terry (May 14, 1997). \"Malone Defeats Jordan In MVP Voting\". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on July 31, 2021. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"1996-97 NBA Awards Voting\". Basketball Reference. Archived from the original on May 4, 2021. Retrieved October 22, 2022.^ Felton, Robert (April 15, 2011). \"NBA: The Eight Most Controversial MVP Wins of All Time\". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on May 23, 2021. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"Glen Rice's 1997 All-Star MVP award remains Hornets' top honor\" Archived February 10, 2024, at the Wayback Machine. Spartanburg Herald-Journal. February 10, 2019. Retrieved April 8, 2022.^ Porter, p. 119.^ Smith, Stephen A. (May 30, 1998). \"Still In The Hunt: Pacers Hold Off Bulls To Force Game 7\". The Philadelphia Inquirer. Archived March 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved May 14, 2017.^ Lazenby, p. 596.^ a b c \"Greatest Finals Moments\". NBA.com. Archived April 11, 2013, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved June 26, 2022.^ Quinn, Sam (May 20, 2020). \"Michael Jordan's final shot over Bryon Russell: How Bulls spent two years setting up legendary basket vs. Jazz\". CBS Sports. Archived from the original on April 25, 2022. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Golliver, Ben (April 23, 2013). \"Phil Jackson on Michael Jordan's push-off: 'A helping hand to a broke down comrade'\". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on June 7, 2021. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Medina, Mark (May 17, 2021). \"Michael Jordan insists in 'The Last Dance' he did not push off on Bryon Russell in 1998 NBA Finals\". USA Today. Archived from the original on June 7, 2021. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"Did Michael Jordan push off on Bryon Russell? Veteran NBA ref Danny Crawford's take\". NBC Sports. May 20, 2021. Archived from the original on June 7, 2021. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Lee, Michael (June 14, 2018). \"Was Michael Jordan's final shot with the Bulls a foul? A retired referee who officiated Game 6 of the 1998 NBA Finals explains\". Archived January 25, 2020, at the Wayback Machine. Yahoo! Sports. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Isola, Frank (June 15, 1998). \"Michael Jordan scores 45 points to lead Bulls to sixth NBA title in win over Utah Jazz\". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on August 3, 2021. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ McGee, Nicholas (May 29, 2019). \"Jordan's Bulls and Kobe's Lakers: The three-peat teams Golden State is trying to emulate\". Archived January 25, 2020, at the Wayback Machine. The Sporting News. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Ryan, Jeff (June 14, 1998). \"History of the NBA Finals: Chicago Bulls vs. Utah Jazz \u2013 1998\". The Sporting News. Archived May 23, 2002, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved May 9, 2017.^ Cohen, Rachel (June 5, 2008). \"Lakers-Celtics should grab big TV ratings\". Post and Courier. Archived January 27, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved May 14, 2017.^ \"NBA Finals Game 6 nets ratings record for NBC\". Jet. Vol.\u00a094, no.\u00a06. Johnson Publishing Company. July 6, 1998. p.\u00a047. ISSN\u00a00021-5996. Retrieved April 7, 2022 \u2013 via Google Books.^ Kruger, pp. 55\u201356, 59.^ Wise, Mike (January 19, 2002). \"Pro Basketball; It's Bitter In Chicago For Jordan\". Archived July 3, 2017, at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Wise, Mike (January 21, 1999). \"Pro Basketball; The Business Of Basketball Now Begins In Earnest\". Archived March 10, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Sandomir, Richard (January 20, 2000). \"Jordan Sheds Uniform for Suit as a Wizards Owner\". Archived November 9, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ a b c d \"Pollin's decision to cut ties leaves Jordan livid\". Archived October 25, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. ESPN. May 9, 2003. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Brady, Erik (May 7, 2003). \"Wizards show Jordan the door\". Archived February 18, 2013, at the Wayback Machine. USA Today. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Associated Press (February 22, 2001). \"Making his move\". CNN/Sports Illustrated. Archived November 16, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved May 9, 2017.^ Matthews, Marcus (March 1, 2001). \"Losing never looked so good for Wizards\". Archived October 23, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. USA Today. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Wilbon, Michael (July 16, 2005). \"So Long, Kwame, Thanks for Nothing\". Archived November 7, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. The Washington Post. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ a b Araton, Harvey (October 2, 2001). \"Sports of The Times; Old Coach Rejoins Old Warrior\". Archived November 10, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ a b White, Joseph (September 23, 2001). \"Jordan comeback raises questions\". Archived January 28, 2013, at the Wayback Machine. CBC.ca. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Associated Press (October 2, 2001). \"Jordan watched Lemieux's comeback very closely\". Archived December 1, 2008, at the Wayback Machine. ESPN. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"Penny outshines MJ at 'Comeback Camp'\". CNN/Sports Illustrated. August 25, 2001. Archived April 26, 2004, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved May 9, 2017.^ Pollin Establishes Education Fund. Archived December 20, 2009, at the Wayback Machine, NBA, September 9, 2002. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ News Summary. Archived November 9, 2012, at the Wayback Machine, The New York Times, September 26, 2001. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Wise, Mike (January 13, 2002). \"Pro Basketball: Inside The N.B.A.; Jordan Lifts Wizards And His M.V.P. Bid\". The New York Times. ISSN\u00a00362-4331. Archived from the original on May 18, 2021. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"The Baltimore Sun from Baltimore, Maryland \u00b7 Page A12\". Newspapers.com. February 2, 2002. Archived from the original on May 18, 2021. Retrieved October 30, 2023. But the race for the NBA's Most Valuable Player award has a late 1980s-early 1990s feel about it, with Michael Jordan competing against a point guard. ... But Jordan, who has returned from retirement to breathe life into the left-for-dead Washington Wizards, and Kidd, who has quarterbacked the Nets out of the mire of the Meadowlands swamps, are the odds-on favorites. ... Jordan's return from three years of retirement has been remarkable, with five 40-point performances already. He is also rebounding and handing out assists on par with his career averages. Most importantly, his indomitable will and thirst for winning have lifted Washington into playoff contention with more wins by Jan. 24 than they had all of last season. ... But if the Nets slip and the Wizards make the playoffs, Jordan will have earned what would be a record-tying sixth MVP.^ \"2001\u201302 NBA Awards Voting\". Basketball Reference. Archived from the original on March 28, 2022. Retrieved October 22, 2022.^ \"Jordan has surgery; absence to be determined\". ESPN.com. Associated Press. February 27, 2002. Archived from the original on August 13, 2021. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"Jordan remains questionable with bum knee\". ESPN.com. Associated Press. February 25, 2002. Archived from the original on May 18, 2021. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ a b \"Washington Wizards\". Basketball Reference. Archived from the original on June 25, 2012. Retrieved October 22, 2022.^ \"Michael Jordan 2001\u201302 Splits\". Archived February 9, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. Basketball Reference. Retrieved October 22, 2022.^ \"Bryant, West hold on to win NBA All-Star game\". NBA.com. February 26, 2012. Archived March 1, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved August 2, 2019.^ \"NBA All-Star Game Career Leaders\". Archived November 7, 2017, at the Wayback Machine. Basketball Reference. Retrieved October 22, 2022.^ \"Jordan Pours in History-Making 43\". NBA.com. February 21, 2003. Archived January 19, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved August 2, 2019.^ NBA Attendance Report \u2013 2003. Archived June 29, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. ESPN. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ a b Maaddi, Rob. Collins feels Jordan's pain. Archived October 23, 2012, at the Wayback Machine, Associated Press, USA Today, November 29, 2001. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ a b Associated Press (April 12, 2003). \"Bad chemistry left MJ unable to win in Washington\". CNN/Sports Illustrated. Archived May 6, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved May 9, 2017.^ Johnson, K. C. (January 25, 2003). \"Lengthy ovation moves Jordan\". Archived December 4, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. Chicago Tribune. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"Heat retires first number\". CNN/Sports Illustrated. April 11, 2003. Archived November 26, 2005, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved May 9, 2017.^ Associated Press (February 8, 2003). \"Thanks, but no thanks: Jordan not interested in ceremonial starting role\". CNN/Sports Illustrated. Archived February 20, 2003, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved May 9, 2017.^ Zeisberger, Mike (December 18, 2004). \"Vince's wild ride\". Canoe.com. . Retrieved February 2, 2024.^ \"Sixers Prevail in Jordan's Final Game\". NBA.com. April 16, 2003. Archived from the original on January 19, 2012. Retrieved August 2, 2019.^ Lazenby, p. 202.^ \"Ninth Pan American Games \u2013 1983\". USA Basketball. Archived from the original on November 20, 2020. Retrieved September 17, 2023.^ \"Games of the XXIIIrd Olympiad \u2013 1984\". USA Basketball. Archived from the original on November 20, 2020. Retrieved September 17, 2023.^ \"Men's Tournament of the Americas \u2013 1992\". USA Basketball. Archived from the original on November 20, 2020. Retrieved September 17, 2023.^ \"Games of the XXVth Olympiad \u2013 1992\". USA Basketball. Archived from the original on November 20, 2020. Retrieved September 17, 2023.^ \"How Many Has Michael Made?\". NBA.com. Archived from the original on July 12, 2014. Retrieved August 1, 2021.^ Donnelly, Sally B (January 9, 1989). \"Great Leapin' Lizards! Michael Jordan Can't Actually Fly, But\". Time. Retrieved July 21, 2021.^ Jackson, Phil (July 1998). \"Michael and Me\". Inside Stuff (June/July). Archived February 11, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved July 27, 2019.^ DeCourcy, Mike (July 21, 2006). \"A suspension for talking trash? Mamma mia!\". The Sporting News. Retrieved May 9, 2017.^ Condor, pp. xviii\u2013xx.^ \"Pro Basketball; Jordan's Knee Problems May Force Him to Sideline\". Archived May 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times. February 26, 2002. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Jordan, p. 155. Archived June 10, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved April 7, 2022.^ DuPree, David (February 9, 2003). \"Jordan wears 'greatest' crown\". Archived May 1, 2013, at the Wayback Machine. USA Today. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Jordan, p. 5.^ \"NBA & ABA Career Leaders and Records for Free Throw Attempts\". Archived March 7, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Basketball Reference. Retrieved October 22, 2022.^ a b Quinn, Sam (May 11, 2020). \"How Michael Jordan bulked up to outmuscle Pistons, win first NBA championship with Bulls\". CBS Sports. Retrieved March 7, 2024.^ Brown, Hubie. \"Hubie Brown on Jordan\". NBA.com. Archived April 11, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved August 2, 2019.^ Trivic, Filip (January 25, 2021). \"Why Michael Jordan didn't want to excel at three-point shooting\". Basketball Network. Archived from the original on May 22, 2021. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Strauss, Ethan Sherwood (August 13, 2013). Jordan's forgotten advantage over LeBron. Archived January 18, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, ESPN. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Marsupalami, Zachmo (September 14, 2011). \"Why Michael Jordan Was a Better 3-Point Shooter Than Kobe Bryant\". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on May 22, 2021. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Wilson, Josh (May 16, 2020). \"Chicago Bulls: Would Michael Jordan become a 3-point shooter in today's NBA?\". Hoops Habit. Archived from the original on May 22, 2021. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Cova, Ernesto (May 22, 2021). \"Michael Jordan Was A Better 3-Point Shooter Than LeBron James And Kobe Bryant\". Fadeaway World. Archived from the original on May 22, 2021. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Ladewski, Paul (December 1987). \"What Does He Do for an Encore?\". Hoop Magazine. Archived April 11, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved August 2, 2019.^ \"NBA & ABA Career Leaders and Records for Steals\". Archived July 16, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. Basketball Reference. Retrieved March 16, 2023.^ a b \"Michael Jordan: A tribute: Praise from his peers, NBA's 50 greatest sing MJ's praises\". CNN/Sports Illustrated. February 1, 1999. Archived January 4, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved May 9, 2017.^ MacMullan, Jackie (May 12, 2020). \"Michael Jordan also dominated the NBA on defense\". ESPN. Archived from the original on December 17, 2020. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Simmons, Bill (June 19, 2014). \"B.S. Report: Al Michaels\". Archived June 22, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. Grantland. 1:29\u20132:45. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Drehs, Wayne (June 12, 2001). \"Shaq: Play me, Dikembe: Play the game\". Archived July 9, 2020, at the Wayback Machine. ESPN. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Verdi, Bob (February 7, 1985). \"Bird Is Sold On Jordan, NBA's Future\". Archived November 1, 2020, at the Wayback Machine. Chicago Tribune. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ NBA & ABA All-Defensive Teams. Archived January 1, 2011, at the Wayback Machine, Basketball-Reference. Retrieved October 22, 2022.^ Porter, pp. 151\u2013152.^ Sachare, Alex (June 1996). \"Go-Two Guys\". Hoop Magazine. Archived December 1, 2008, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved August 2, 2019.^ \"NBA & ABA Career Playoff Leaders and Records for Points\". Archived April 13, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. Basketball-Reference. Retrieved October 22, 2022.^ a b \"NBA History \u2013 Points Leaders\". Archived January 14, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. ESPN. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Gaines, Cork (June 20, 2016). \"Only 3 players in NBA history have won more trophies than LeBron James\". Archived May 27, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. Business Insider. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"50 Greatest Players in NBA History\". Basketball Reference. Archived from the original on September 3, 2022. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"Basketball's Triple Crown\". The Post Game. Archived from the original on February 12, 2023. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Malinowski, Erik (June 17, 2014). \"Four decades after NBA merger, ABA's spirit stronger than ever\". Archived May 1, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. Fox Sports. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"Most NBA Championships Won\". Archived October 18, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Basketball Reference. Retrieved October 22, 2022.^ \"Moving Pictures: All-Star Ballot winners\". NBA.com. Archived April 30, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. January 21, 2005. Retrieved August 2, 2019.^ a b \"Top N. American athletes of the century\". Archived April 28, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. ESPN. 1999. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"Ruth, Didrikson Named Top Athletes\" Archived February 10, 2024, at the Wayback Machine. Los Angeles Times. December 12, 1999. Retrieved December 7, 2019.^ \"His Airness flies away with century's best award\". Associated Press. December 11, 1999. Archived June 21, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved March 3, 2018.^ \"Michael Jordan's 50 SI Covers\". Archived February 12, 2017, at the Wayback Machine. Sports Illustrated. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"Final Out: 1996\". Sport. 90 (7/July 1999): 96.^ a b c Hubbard, Jan (April 1997). \"Jordan on Jordan\". Hoops Magazine. Archived June 24, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved November 22, 2019.^ Fitzpatrick, Curry (November 9, 1987). \"In An Orbit All His Own\". Archived April 30, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. Sports Illustrated. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"James says he'll decide his future soon\". Sports Illustrated. Associated Press. April 16, 2003. Archived March 12, 2004, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved May 19, 2017.^ Ginsbrug, Steve (June 21, 2006). \"Wade scoffs at Jordan comparisons\". Reuters. Archived December 27, 2008, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved May 9, 2017.^ Stein, Mark (October 29, 2001). \"Kobe, Hill deal with being the next Michael\". Archived August 6, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. ESPN. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Isidore, Chris (June 23, 2006). \"The next 'next Jordan'\". Archived November 16, 2020, at the Wayback Machine. CNN. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Araton, Harvey (December 28, 2005). \"Sports of The Times; Will James Be the Next Jordan or the Next Carter?\". Archived August 10, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Devine, Dan (March 11, 2020). \"How the Point-MJ Experiment Foreshadowed the Modern NBA\". The Ringer. Archived from the original on January 18, 2022. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"Why Michael Jordan should've been point guard according to Don Nelson\". NBC Sports. May 2, 2020. Archived from the original on May 23, 2021. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ a b Rovell, Darren (September 23, 2001). \"NBA could cash in if TV ratings soar with Jordan\". Archived May 22, 2006, at the Wayback Machine. ESPN. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Palumbo, Jacqui (April 11, 2023). \"Michael Jordan's 1998 NBA Finals sneakers sell for a record $2.2 million\". CNN. Archived from the original on June 17, 2023. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"Hall opens a Jordan exhibit\". The New York Times. August 3, 2009. p. D5.^ Spears, Marc J. (September 7, 2009). \"Thompson to open Hall's doors for Jordan\". Archived May 1, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. Yahoo! Sports. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Germano, Sara (February 4, 2016). \"Michael Jordan Surges on Web as 'Crying Jordan'\". Archived December 16, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Carson, Dan (April 5, 2016). \"How Crying Jordan became the most divisive image on the Internet\". Archived April 10, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. Fox Sports. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Liang, Annabelle (September 16, 2022). \"Michael Jordan's 'Last Dance' jersey fetches record $10.1m\". BBC News. Archived from the original on October 12, 2022. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"NBA unveils The Michael Jordan Trophy to be awarded to Kia MVP\". NBA.com. Archived from the original on February 20, 2023. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ a b Goldsberry, Kirk (December 13, 2022). \"NBA naming MVP after Michael Jordan as top awards reimagined\". ESPN. Archived from the original on January 7, 2023. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"NBA & ABA Single Season Playoff Leaders and Records for Points Per Game\". Basketball Reference. Archived from the original on April 7, 2016. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ a b c \"Michael Jordan's Honors\". Archived October 4, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. NBA. Retrieved August 2, 2019.^ a b Reisinger, Adam (September 8, 2017). \"Inside the numbers on retired numbers around the NBA\". Archived October 29, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. ESPN. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Taylor, Ryan (January 11, 2024). \"What's the Bulls Ring of Honor ceremony? Here's everything you need to know\". WMAQ-TV. Archived from the original on February 3, 2024. Retrieved February 3, 2024.^ \"Men's Tournament of the Americas \u2013 1992\". USA Basketball. Retrieved September 17, 2023.^ \"Ninth Pan American Games \u2013 1983\". USA Basketball. Retrieved September 17, 2023.^ a b c Hamm, Jordan Named ACC's Greatest Athletes. Archived October 29, 2018, at the Wayback Machine, University of North Carolina, March 13, 2003. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"Jordan, Hamm Named ACC's Greatest Athletes\". WRAL-TV. March 13, 2003. Archived from the original on February 11, 2023. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"Oscar Robertson Trophy\". Archived May 22, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. United States Basketball Writers Association. Retrieved October 22, 2022.^ \"Rupp Trophy Winners\". Archived July 25, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. Sports Reference. Retrieved October 22, 2022.^ \"Sporting News Player of the Year Winner\". Sports Reference LLC. Archived from the original on May 15, 2012. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"Jamison's 33 Retired Wednesday Night\". Archived October 29, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. University of North Carolina. February 29, 2000. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"Parade All-America\". Sports Reference LLC. Archived from the original on May 16, 2022. Retrieved October 22, 2022.^ \"AP Athletes of the Year\". Archived October 11, 2017, at the Wayback Machine. Associated Press. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"Sportsman of the Year\". Archived August 24, 2017, at the Wayback Machine. Sports Illustrated. December 23, 1991. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"The New Top 50\". Slam. June 19, 2009. Archived May 15, 2013, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved December 12, 2018.^ Snedeker, Lisa (February 13, 2001). \"Tiger Woods Wins Record 4 ESPYs\". Archived March 31, 2019, at the Wayback Machine. ABC News. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"Marca Leyenda\". Archived April 6, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. Marca (in Spanish). Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Rhodes, Steve (November 7, 1994). \"Even In Bronze, Jordan Spirit Is A Real Magnet\". Archived April 4, 2019, at the Wayback Machine. Chicago Tribune. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Davis, Robert (March 1, 1994). \"Jordan to get his own street near stadium\". Archived November 18, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. Chicago Tribune. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Wise, Mike (May 4, 2003). \"Pro Basketball; Jordan's Strained Ties to Wizards May Be Cut\". Archived November 10, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Grass, Ray (June 22, 2006). \"Michael Jordan is now riding superbikes\". Deseret News. Retrieved August 31, 2017.^ \"Jordan Suzuki Previews The AMA Superbike Championship Finale At Mazda Raceway Laguna Seca\". Archived January 31, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. Roadracing World & Motorcycle Technology. September 11, 2007. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Swarts, David (October 29, 2013). \"Michael Jordan Motorsports Suspending AMA Pro Road Racing Operations, Focusing On Move To International Competition\". Archived March 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. Roadracing World & Motorcycle Technology. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"Michael Jordan to Become Part Owner of the Charlotte Bobcats\". Archived June 18, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. NBA. June 15, 2006. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Associated Press (May 20, 2014). \"Hornets all the buzz in Charlotte\". Archived April 1, 2019, at the Wayback Machine. ESPN. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Associated Press (June 15, 2006). \"Jordan writes state of Bobcats letter to fans\". Archived February 21, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. ESPN. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Associated Press (May 10, 1999). \"Shinn says others interested in buying piece of Hornets\". Archived January 4, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. Lubbock Avalanche-Journal. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Cox, Marty (February 16, 2010). \"Michael Jordan & Charlotte Bobcats \u2013 NBA Legend Wants to Buy Team, Report\". National Ledger. Archived February 20, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved August 31, 2017.^ Associated Press. \"MJ to buy controlling stake in Bobcats\". Archived November 22, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. ESPN. February 27, 2010. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Associated Press (March 17, 2010). \"Jordan purchase of Bobcats approved\". Archived November 4, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. ESPN. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Rhoden, William C. \"Want to Make an Impact? Join Jordan\". Archived February 2, 2017, at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times. April 27, 2010. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Beck, Howard (November 5, 2011). \"Hard-Line Factions Threaten Latest N.B.A. Negotiations\". The New York Times. Archived September 5, 2012, at archive.today. Retrieved July 9, 2019.^ a b Whitlock, Jason (November 5, 2011). \"MJ sells out players with hard-line stance\". Fox Sports. Archived November 7, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved May 18, 2017.^ Sports Network (April 27, 2012). \"Knicks earn No. 7, Bobcats set dubious record\". Archived January 21, 2013, at the Wayback Machine. Fox News. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Associated Press (November 2, 2012). \"Michael Jordan committed to Bobcats\". Archived November 4, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. ESPN. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Bonnell, Rick (September 14, 2019). \"Michael Jordan selling large chunk of Hornets; won't give up majority control\". Archived September 27, 2019, at the Wayback Machine. The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"Hornets Executive Bios\". Archived January 22, 2021, at the Wayback Machine. NBA. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Wojnarowski, Adrian (June 16, 2023). \"Sources: Michael Jordan finalizing sale of Charlotte Hornets\". espn.com. Archived from the original on June 16, 2023. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Maloney, Jack (August 3, 2023). \"Michael Jordan's 13-year run as Hornets owner ends as franchise completes $3 billion sale\". CBS Sports. Archived from the original on August 7, 2023. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ \"Denny Hamlin forming Cup team with Michael Jordan; Bubba Wallace to drive; charter from Germain Racing\". Jayski's Silly Season Site. NASCAR Digital Media. Archived from the original on October 2, 2020. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Albert, Zack (October 22, 2020). \"Jordan, Hamlin announce team name and number: 23XI Racing and No. 23\". Archived October 22, 2020, at the Wayback Machine. NASCAR. Retrieved October 30, 2023.^ Taranto, Steven (August 27, 2021). \"Kurt Busch joins Michael Jordan's 23XI Racing team for 2022 NASCAR Cup Series season in new No. 45 Toyota\". CBS Sports. Retrieved March 28, 2023.^ Long, Dustin (October 15, 2022). \"Tyler Reddick to drive for 23XI Racing in 2023\". NBC Sports. Retrieved March 28, 2023.^ \"Ty Gibbs to make Cup Series debut in place of Kurt Busch at Pocono\". NASCAR.com. NASCAR Digital Media, LLC. July 24, 2022. Retrieved March 28, 2023.^ \"Bubba Wallace suspended after Las Vegas incident; No. 18 team penalized\". NASCAR.com. NASCAR Digital Media, LLC. October 18, 2022. Retrieved March 28, 2023.^ Crandall, Kelly (November 6, 2022). \"Hemric stands in for Gibbs at 23XI for Phoenix finale\". Racer. Retrieved March 28, 2023.^ Albert, Zack (February 15, 2023). \"Jimmie Johnson, Travis Pastrana lock up berths in Daytona 500 field\". NASCAR. Retrieved March 28, 2023.^ Reardon, Logan (September 11, 2022). \"Bubba Wallace wins for Michael Jordan's 23XI Racing at Kansas\". NBC Sports. Retrieved December 2, 2022.^ Cain, Holly (March 26, 2023). \"Tyler Reddick scores first 2023 win at COTA in triple overtime\". NASCAR. Retrieved March 28, 2023.^ \"William Byron leads Cup drivers making biggest leaps in performance\". NBC Sports. November 25, 2023. Retrieved January 27, 2024.^ \"Justin Jordan, MJ's nephew, transfers to UNC Greensboro\". ESPN.com. Associated Press. January 19, 2016. Retrieved March 13, 2019.^ Northam, Mitchell (October 5, 2019). \"Hornets notebook: J. Cole stops by, staff changes, injuries\". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved April 1, 2020.^ \"Michael Jordan of the Chicago Bulls married...\" Los Angeles Times. September 8, 1989. Retrieved November 6, 2021.^ \"Jordan married in Las Vegas ceremony\". United Press International. September 7, 1989. Retrieved November 6, 2021.^ Phillips, Hedy (May 22, 2020). \"Get to Know Michael Jordan's Kids \u2013 Jeffrey, Marcus, Jasmine, Victoria, and Ysabel\". Yahoo! Sports. Retrieved November 6, 2021.^ Associated Press. \"Jordan, wife end marriage 'mutually, amicably'\". ESPN.com. December 30, 2006. Retrieved January 15, 2007.^ \"Michael Jordan, Wife to Divorce After 17 Years\". People, December 30, 2006. Retrieved January 15, 2007.^ Associated Press (April 14, 2007). \"Forbes: Jordan Divorce Most Costly Ever\". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 1, 2013.^ Tadena, Nathalie; Zhou, Momo (August 20, 2009). \"Divorce Has a Hefty Price Tag for Celebrities, Billionaires\". ABC News. Retrieved June 28, 2020.^ Rodkin, Dennis (February 29, 2012). \"Michael Jordan Lists Highland Park Mansion for $29 Million\". Chicago Magazine. Archived June 6, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved December 16, 2021.^ Kirkpatrick, Emily (March 23, 2021). \"Nine Years Later, Michael Jordan Still Can't Sell His $14.8 Million Illinois Mansion\". Vanity Fair. Retrieved May 6, 2022.^ a b Associated Press (June 12, 2003). \"Judge says Jordan not obligated to pay ex-lover\". USA Today. Retrieved January 16, 2007.^ Associated Press (July 22, 2006). \"Judge: Alleged deal between Jordan, ex-lover invalid\". ESPN.com. Retrieved March 3, 2011,^ \"Jordan's former girlfriend shouldn't get another cent\". USA Today. November 25, 2002. Retrieved February 12, 2009.^ \"Jordan's Ex-Lover Counters With $5\u00a0Million Lawsuit\". WHIO-TV. November 19, 2002. Archived February 24, 2009, at the Wayback Machine Retrieved May 9, 2017.^ Troop, Caleb (December 29, 2011). \"Bobcats owner Michael Jordan is engaged\". WCNC-TV. Archived July 21, 2013, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved May 14, 2017.^ Garcia, Jennifer (April 27, 2013). \"Michael Jordan Marries Model Yvette Prieto\". People. Retrieved April 27, 2013.^ Reuters (April 27, 2013). \"Michael Jordan marries longtime girlfriend\". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved October 29, 2013.^ Golliver, Ben (November 30, 2013). \"Reports: Michael Jordan, wife Yvette Prieto expecting first child\". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved May 14, 2017.^ Webber, Stephanie (November 30, 2013). \"Michael Jordan, Wife Yvette Prieto Expecting First Child Seven Months After Tying the Knot\". Us Weekly. Retrieved December 5, 2013.^ \"Michael Jordan, Yvette Prieto welcome twin girls\". CBS News. February 12, 2014. Retrieved February 20, 2014.^ Herbert, Geoff (May 18, 2019). \"Rakeem Christmas welcomes baby, making Michael Jordan a grandfather\". The Post-Standard. Retrieved May 20, 2019.^ a b c Rovell, Darren (February 17, 2003). \"Jordan's 10 greatest commercials ever\". ESPN. Retrieved January 16, 2007.^ Vancil, Mark (December 1991). \"Michael Jordan: Phenomenon\". Hoops Magazine. Archived April 11, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved August 2, 2019.^ Thompson, Phil (August 31, 2016). \"'Banned' Air Jordans have slightly different history than Nike's narrative\". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved September 7, 2018.^ \"Michael Jordan\". Forbes. July 2006. Retrieved February 23, 2007.^ \"Team Jordan\". Nike. Retrieved May 14, 2017.^ \"Jordan Brand Gearing Up For March Madness\". Nike. Archived March 14, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. March 14, 2012. Retrieved September 6, 2022.^ \"UCLA will be outfitted by Nike, Jordan Brand starting in '21\". Associated Press. December 8, 2020. Retrieved September 6, 2022.^ Horovitz, Bruce (January 28, 1992). \"'Hare Jordan' May Give Animation Ads a Lift\". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved December 7, 2019.^ a b Porter, p. 96.^ \"Michael Jackson's 20 Greatest Videos: The Stories Behind the Vision\". Archived September 11, 2017, at the Wayback Machine. Rolling Stone. June 24, 2014. Retrieved October 22, 2022.^ \"#18 Michael Jordan\" Forbes. June 2008. Retrieved February 16, 2009.^ Redenbach, Andrew (July 2008). \"A Multiple Product Endorser can be a Credible Source\". Cyber-Journal of Sport Marketing. Archived February 20, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. ISSN\u00a01327-6816. Retrieved May 15, 2017.^ Rovell, Darren (April 15, 2003). \"Cashing in on the ultimate cash cow\". ESPN. Retrieved January 16, 2007.^ \"Michael Jordan signs deal with Bulls worth more than $30 million\". Jet. Vol.\u00a082, no.\u00a017. Johnson Publishing Company. September 15, 1997. p.\u00a051. ISSN\u00a00021-5996. Retrieved April 7, 2022 \u2013 via Google Books.^ Mathur, Ike; Mathur, Lynette Knowles; Rangan, Nanda (May\u2013June 1997). \"The Wealth Effects Associated with a Celebrity Endorser: The Michael Jordan Phenomenon\". Journal of Advertising Research. World Advertising Research Center. 37 (3): 67\u201373. Retrieved April 7, 2022 \u2013 via Gale.^ Powell, Shaun (March 29, 1999). \"Executive privilege\". The Sporting News. Vol.\u00a0223, no.\u00a013. p.\u00a010. ISSN\u00a00038-805X.^ Benes, Alejandro (May 2003). \"Fame Jam\". Cigar Aficionado. Archived June 7, 2007, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved October 13, 2017.^ \"#20 Michael Jordan\". Forbes. June 2010. Retrieved September 8, 2010.^ Davis, Adam (June 20, 2014). \"Michael Jordan Becomes First Billionaire NBA Player\". Fox Business Network. Archived June 27, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved March 11, 2018.^ Ozanian, Mike (June 12, 2014). \"Michael Jordan Is A Billionaire After Increasing Stake In Hornets\". Forbes. Retrieved June 25, 2014.^ Spanberg, Eric (January 20, 2015). \"Michael Jordan in tears as he accepts Business Person of the Year honors\". Charlotte Business Journal. Retrieved January 21. 2015.^ Jackson, Barry (August 11, 2017). \"Loria agrees to sell Miami Marlins to Sherman and Jeter, source says\". Miami Herald. Retrieved October 3, 2017.^ \"Michael Jordan named world's highest-paid athlete ever\". NBA. December 15, 2017. Retrieved December 29, 2017.^ Neuharth-Keusch, AJ (March 31, 2016). \"Michael Jordan tops Forbes' list of highest-paid retired athletes\". USA Today. Retrieved December 29, 2017.^ Williams, Ebony (February 28, 2023). \"Forbes: These are the world's 14 Black billionaires\". The Atlanta Journal-Constitution. Retrieved May 1, 2023.^ Mullaney, Timothy J. (December 13, 1995). \"Jordan, partners hope car dealership scores big: Hoops star owns Glen Burnie outlet\". Archived June 12, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. The Baltimore Sun. Retrieved October 8, 2022.^ a b Burkitt, Janet (February 27, 1997). \"Michael Jordan Teams With Car Dealership\". The Washington Post. Retrieved June 24, 2018.^ \"Michael Jordan dealership in Durham to close\". WRAL-TV. June 17, 2009. Retrieved July 19, 2019.^ Potempa, Philip (December 28, 2011). \"Scoring major points: Michael Jordan's Steak House new location a delicious win\". The Times of Northwest Indiana. Retrieved June 24, 2018.^ Fabricant, Florence (December 31, 2018). \"Seafood With Korean Touches Comes to Park Slope, Brooklyn\". The New York Times. Retrieved July 23, 2021.^ Porter, Kyle (February 6, 2018). \"Michael Jordan is building a golf course in Florida set to open in 2019\". CBS Sports. Retrieved October 18, 2019.^ Goldstein, Steve (September 2, 2020). \"DraftKings jumps after addition of NBA legend Michael Jordan as investor and adviser\". MarketWatch. Retrieved September 24, 2020.^ a b c \"Michael Jordan's philanthropic activities\". NBA. February 15, 2019. Retrieved October 15, 2019.^ Meyer, Gregory (March 13, 2006). \"Jordans to pledge $5M to Hales Franciscan H.S.\" Crain's Chicago Business. Retrieved July 28, 2008.^ \"Jordan Brand Donates $500,000 to Boys and Girls Club in Louisiana\". Reuters. February 14, 2008. Archived January 4, 2009, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved May 9, 2017.^ \"Celebrating 200 Wishes With Michael Jordan\". Make-A-Wish Foundation. Archived June 26, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. June 2014. Retrieved October 3, 2019.^ Morik, Ryan (February 15, 2023). \"Michael Jordan donates $10\u00a0million to Make-A-Wish Foundation, the charity's largest donation ever\". Fox News. Retrieved February 16, 2023.^ Janssen, Kim (December 15, 2015). \"Michael Jordan hands court settlement to 23 Chicago nonprofits\". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved October 3, 2019.^ Maloney, Jack (October 9, 2017). \"Michael Jordan makes largest philanthropic donation ever to fund clinics in Charlotte\". CBS Sports. Retrieved October 3, 2019.^ Schad, Tom (September 18, 2018). \"Michael Jordan donating $2 million to Hurricane Florence relief and recovery efforts\". USA Today. Retrieved October 15, 2019.^ O'Kane, Caitlin (September 10, 2019). \"Michael Jordan donates $1 million to hurricane relief in the Bahamas\". CBS News. Retrieved October 3, 2019.^ \"Michael Jordan Giving $100 Million to Organizations for Racial Equality and Justice\". Time. June 5, 2020. Archived from the original on June 6, 2020. Retrieved July 21, 2021. {{cite magazine}}: Unknown parameter |agency= ignored (help)^ Schaefer, Rob (February 15, 2021). \"Michael Jordan Donates $10 Million to Open Medical Clinics in Home County\". NBC Chicago. Retrieved October 11, 2021.^ Brito, Christopher (February 15, 2021). \"Michael Jordan donates $10 million for 2 new medical clinics in his North Carolina hometown\". CBS News. Retrieved October 11, 2021.^ Braxton, Greg (May 10, 2020). \"'Drove Michael crazy': Space Jam director on ups and downs of Jordan's star turn\". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved June 4, 2020.^ Izadi, Elahe (November 15, 2016). \"Twenty years later, 'Space Jam' is the movie we never knew we needed'\". The Washington Post. Retrieved June 4, 2020.^ Johnson, K. C. (April 30, 2020). \"How 'Michael Jordan to the Max' contributed to delaying 'The Last Dance'\". NBC Sports Chicago. Retrieved June 4, 2020.^ Shelburne, Ramona (April 18, 2020). \"An all-access Michael Jordan documentary? How 'The Last Dance' was made possible\". ESPN. Retrieved May 23, 2020.^ Price, Satchel (September 20, 2020). \"Another trophy for MJ: 'The Last Dance' wins Emmy for outstanding documentary\". Chicago Sun-Times. Retrieved November 23, 2020.^ Guerrasio, Jason (May 7, 2020). \"Michael Jordan refused to be filmed in his own home for 'The Last Dance' \u2013 here's where the basketball legend's interviews took place\". Business Insider. Retrieved September 29, 2020.^ \"Michael Jordan Gave Travis Scott Blessing to Use Mansion for Music Video 'Without Hesitation'\". Complex. September 26, 2020. Retrieved September 29, 2020.^ Bumbaca, Chris (July 18, 2022). \"Derek Jeter like you've never seen him: 'The Captain' uncovers the man behind Yankees' legend\". USA Today. Retrieved July 31, 2022.^ Kakutani, Michiko (October 22, 1993). \"Books of The Times; The (Once and Future?) Kings of the Court Reflect\". The New York Times. Retrieved July 16, 2021.^ Warren, James (October 24, 1993). \"Rare DEA\". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved July 16, 2021.^ \"I Can't Accept Not Trying: Michael Jordan on the Pursuit of Excellence\". WorldCat. Retrieved March 12, 2023.^ Kuczynski, Alex (January 11, 1999). \"Publishers Root for Michael Jordan's Retirement\". The New York Times. Retrieved January 3, 2019.^ \"Driven From Within\" WorldCat. Retrieved March 12, 2023.SourcesExternal videos Discussion with Halberstam on Playing for Keeps: Michael Jordan and the World He Made, February 22, 1999, C-SPANCondor, Bob (1998). Michael Jordan's 50 Greatest Games. Carol Publishing Group. ISBN\u00a0978-0-8065-2030-8.Halberstam, David (2000). Playing for Keeps: Michael Jordan and the World He Made. Broadway Books. ISBN\u00a0978-0-7679-0444-5.Jordan, Michael (1998). For the Love of the Game: My Story. New York City: Crown Publishers. ISBN\u00a0978-0-609-60206-5.Kotler, Philip; Rein, Irving J.; Shields, Ben (2006). The Elusive Fan: Reinventing Sports in a Crowded Marketplace. The McGraw-Hill Companies. ISBN\u00a0978-0-07-149114-3.Kruger, Mitchell (2003). One Last Shot: The Story of Michael Jordan's Comeback. New York City: St. Martin's Paperbacks. ISBN\u00a0978-0-312-99223-1.Lazenby, Roland (2014). Michael Jordan: The Life. New York City: Little, Brown and Company. ISBN\u00a0978-0-316-19477-8.LaFeber, Walter (2002). Michael Jordan and the New Global Capitalism. W. W. Norton. ISBN\u00a0978-0-393-32369-6.Markovits, Andrei S.; Rensman, Lars (June 3, 2010). Gaming the World: How Sports are Reshaping Global Politics and Culture. Princeton University Press. ISBN\u00a0978-0-691-13751-3.Porter, David L. (2007). Michael Jordan: A Biography. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN\u00a0978-0-313-33767-3.The Sporting News Official NBA Register 1994\u201395 (1994). The Sporting News. ISBN\u00a0978-0-89204-501-3.Further readingHalberstam, David (1999). Playing for Keeps: Michael Jordan and the World That He Made. New York: Random House. ISBN\u00a0978-0679415626.Leahy, Michael (2004). When Nothing Else Matters: Michael Jordan's Last Comeback. Simon & Schuster. ISBN\u00a0978-0-7432-7648-1.McGovern, Mike (2005). Michael Jordan: Basketball Player. Ferguson. ISBN\u00a0978-0-8160-5876-1.External linksListen to this article (1 hour and 0 minutes)This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 19\u00a0January\u00a02013\u00a0(2013-01-19), and does not reflect subsequent edits.(Audio help\u00a0\u00b7 More spoken articles)Michael Jordan  at Wikipedia's sister projectsMedia from CommonsQuotations from WikiquoteData from WikidataCareer statistics and player information from NBA.com\u00a0and\u00a0Basketball-Reference.comMichael Jordan at the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of FameMichael Jordan at CurlieCareer statistics and player information from Baseball Reference (Minors)Michael Jordan Career Retrospective on YouTubeMichael Jordan at IMDb\"Jordan archives\". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on June 5, 1997. Retrieved April 29, 2020.vteMichael JordanAchievementsMainThe ShotGame 6 of the 1998 NBA Finals1982 NCAA Championship GameAir Jordan (Jumpman)Jordan RulesFlu Game shoesLast Dance shoesFamilyJames R. Jordan Sr. (father)Larry Jordan (brother)Jeffrey Jordan (son)Marcus Jordan (son)Yvette Prieto (wife)Rakeem Christmas (son-in-law)BooksThe Jordan Rules (1992)When Nothing Else Matters (2004)Film and televisionProStars (1991)Space Jam (1996)Michael Jordan: An American Hero (1999)Michael Jordan to the Max (2000)Like Mike (2002)Like Mike 2: Streetball (2006)The Last Dance (2020)Air (2023)Video gamesJordan vs. Bird: One on One (1988)Michael Jordan in Flight (1993)Michael Jordan: Chaos in the Windy City (1994)Space Jam (1996)NBA 2K11 (2010)NBA 2K12 (2011)NBA 2K16 (2015)NBA 2K23 (2022)OtherMichael Jordan statueMichael Jordan's RestaurantMichael Jordan's SteakhouseMichael Jackson's \"Jam\" (1992)\"Be Like Mike\" (1992)\"Second Generation\" (2006)Buckethead's \"Jordan\" (2009)Crying Jordan23XI Racing CategoryvteNational Basketball Association ownersEasternConferenceAtlanticBoston Basketball Partners (Boston Celtics)Joseph Tsai (Brooklyn Nets)Madison Square Garden Sports (James L. Dolan) (New York Knicks)Harris Blitzer Sports & Entertainment (Josh Harris and David Blitzer) (Philadelphia 76ers)Maple Leaf Sports & Entertainment (Toronto Raptors)CentralJerry Reinsdorf (Chicago Bulls)Dan Gilbert (Cleveland Cavaliers)Tom Gores (Detroit Pistons)Herb Simon (Indiana Pacers)Wes Edens and Jimmy Haslam (Milwaukee Bucks)SoutheastTony Ressler (Atlanta Hawks)Gabe Plotkin and Rick Schnall (Charlotte Hornets)Micky Arison (Miami Heat)RDV Sports, Inc. (Orlando Magic)Monumental Sports & Entertainment (Ted Leonsis) (Washington Wizards)WesternConferenceSouthwestMiriam Adelson and Patrick Dumont (Dallas Mavericks)Tilman Fertitta (Houston Rockets)Robert Pera (Memphis Grizzlies)Gayle Benson (New Orleans Pelicans)Spurs Sports & Entertainment (Julianna Holt) (San Antonio Spurs)NorthwestAnn Walton Kroenke (Denver Nuggets)Glen Taylor (Minnesota Timberwolves)Professional Basketball Club (Clayton Bennett) (Oklahoma City Thunder)Jody Allen (Portland Trail Blazers)Ryan Smith (Utah Jazz)PacificPeter Guber and Joe Lacob (Golden State Warriors)Steve Ballmer (Los Angeles Clippers)Buss Family Trusts and Jeanie Buss (Los Angeles Lakers)Mat and Justin Ishbia (Phoenix Suns)Vivek Ranadiv\u00e9 (Sacramento Kings)Links to related articlesvteWashington Wizards general managersFrank Lane (1962\u20131963)Paul Hoffman (1964\u20131965)Buddy Jeannette (1965\u20131968)Joe Sachs (1968\u20131970)Jerry Sachs (1970\u20131973)Bob Ferry (1973\u20131990)John Nash (1990\u20131996)Wes Unseld (1996\u20132000)Michael Jordan (2000\u20132001)Wes Unseld (2001\u20132003)Ernie Grunfeld (2003\u20132019)Tommy Sheppard (2019\u20132023)Will Dawkins (2023\u2013present)vteOscar Robertson Trophy winners1959: Robertson1960: Robertson1961: Lucas1962: Lucas1963: Heyman1964: Hazzard1965: Bradley1966: Russell1967: Alcindor1968: Alcindor1969: Maravich1970: Maravich1971: Wicks1972: Walton1973: Walton1974: Walton1975: Thompson1976: Dantley1977: M. Johnson1978: Ford1979: Bird1980: Aguirre1981: Sampson1982: Sampson1983: Sampson1984: Jordan1985: Mullin1986: Berry1987: D. Robinson1988: Hawkins1989: Ferry1990: Simmons1991: L. Johnson1992: Laettner1993: Cheaney1994: G. Robinson1995: O'Bannon1996: Camby1997: Duncan1998: Jamison1999: Brand2000: Martin2001: Battier2002: Williams2003: West2004: Nelson2005: Bogut2006: Morrison & Redick2007: Durant2008: Hansbrough2009: Griffin2010: Turner2011: Fredette2012: Davis2013: Burke2014: McDermott2015: Kaminsky2016: Hield2017: Mason III2018: Brunson2019: Williamson2020: Toppin2021: Garza2022: Tshiebwe2023: Edey2024: EdeyvteAdolph Rupp Trophy winners1972: Walton1973: Walton1974: Walton1975: Thompson1976: May1977: Johnson1978: Lee1979: Bird1980: Aguirre1981: Sampson1982: Sampson1983: Sampson1984: Jordan1985: Ewing1986: Berry1987: D. Robinson1988: Hawkins1989: Elliott1990: Simmons1991: O'Neal1992: Laettner1993: Cheaney1994: G. Robinson1995: Smith1996: Camby1997: Duncan1998: Jamison1999: Brand2000: Martin2001: Battier2002: Williams2003: West2004: Nelson2005: Redick2006: Redick2007: Durant2008: Hansbrough2009: Griffin2010: Wall2011: Fredette2012: Davis2013: Oladipo2014: McDermott2015: KaminskyvteSporting News Men's College Basketball Player of the Year1943: Phillip1944: Hall1945: Mikan1946: Kurland1947\u201349: None selected1950: Arizin1951: White1952\u201357: None selected1958: Robertson1959: Robertson1960: Robertson1961: Lucas1962: Lucas1963: Heyman1964: Bradley1965: Bradley1966: Russell1967: Alcindor1968: Hayes1969: Alcindor1970: Maravich1971: Wicks1972: Walton1973: Walton1974: Walton1975: Thompson1976: May1977: M. Johnson1978: P. Ford1979: Bird1980: Griffith1981: Aguirre1982: Sampson1983: Jordan1984: Jordan1985: Ewing1986: Berry1987: D. Robinson1988: Hawkins1989: King1990: Scott1991: L. Johnson1992: Laettner1993: Cheaney1994: G. Robinson1995: Respert1996: Camby1997: Duncan1998: Jamison1999: Brand2000: Martin2001: Battier2002: Williams2003: T. J. Ford2004: Nelson2005: Brown2006: Redick2007: Durant2008: Hansbrough2009: Griffin2010: Turner2011: Fredette2012: Davis2013: Oladipo2014: McDermott2015: Kaminsky2016: Hield2017: Mason III2018: Brunson2019: Williamson2020: Garza2021: Garza2022: Tshiebwe2023: Edey2024: EdeyvteAssociated Press Men's College Basketball Player of the Year1961: Lucas1962: Lucas1963: Heyman1964: Bradds1965: Bradley1966: Russell1967: Alcindor1968: Hayes1969: Alcindor1970: Maravich1971: Carr1972: Walton1973: Walton1974: Thompson1975: Thompson1976: May1977: Johnson1978: Lee1979: Bird1980: Aguirre1981: Sampson1982: Sampson1983: Sampson1984: Jordan1985: Ewing1986: Berry1987: D. Robinson1988: Hawkins1989: Elliott1990: Simmons1991: O'Neal1992: Laettner1993: Cheaney1994: G. Robinson1995: Smith1996: Camby1997: Duncan1998: Jamison1999: Brand2000: Martin2001: Battier2002: Williams2003: West2004: Nelson2005: Bogut2006: Redick2007: Durant2008: Hansbrough2009: Griffin2010: Turner2011: Fredette2012: Davis2013: Burke2014: McDermott2015: Kaminsky2016: Valentine2017: Mason III2018: Brunson2019: Williamson2020: Toppin2021: Garza2022: Tshiebwe2023: Edey2024: EdeyvteNaismith Men's College Player of the Year1969: Alcindor1970: Maravich1971: Carr1972: Walton1973: Walton1974: Walton1975: Thompson1976: May1977: M. Johnson1978: Lee1979: Bird1980: Aguirre1981: Sampson1982: Sampson1983: Sampson1984: Jordan1985: Ewing1986: Dawkins1987: D. Robinson1988: Manning1989: Ferry1990: Simmons1991: L. Johnson1992: Laettner1993: Cheaney1994: G. Robinson1995: Smith1996: Camby1997: Duncan1998: Jamison1999: Brand2000: Martin2001: Battier2002: Williams2003: Ford2004: Nelson2005: Bogut2006: Redick2007: Durant2008: Hansbrough2009: Griffin2010: Turner2011: Fredette2012: Davis2013: Burke2014: McDermott2015: Kaminsky2016: Hield2017: Mason III2018: Brunson2019: Williamson2020: Toppin2021: Garza2022: Tshiebwe2023: EdeyvteNABC Division I Player of the Year1975: Thompson1976: May1977: M. Johnson1978: Ford1979: Bird1980: Brooks1981: Ainge1982: Sampson1983: Sampson1984: Jordan1985: Ewing1986: Berry1987: D. Robinson1988: Manning1989: Elliott1990: Simmons1991: L. Johnson1992: Laettner1993: Cheaney1994: G. Robinson1995: Respert1996: Camby1997: Duncan1998: Jamison1999: Brand2000: Martin2001: Williams2002: Gooden & Williams2003: Collison2004: Nelson & Okafor2005: Bogut2006: Morrison & Redick2007: Durant2008: Hansbrough2009: Griffin2010: Turner2011: Fredette2012: Green2013: Burke2014: McDermott2015: Kaminsky2016: Valentine2017: Mason2018: Brunson2019: Williamson2020: Toppin2021: Garza2022: Tshiebwe2023: Edey2024: EdeyvteUPI College Basketball Player of the Year Award winners1955: Gola1956: B. Russell1957: Forte1958: Robertson1959: Robertson1960: Robertson1961: Lucas1962: Lucas1963: Heyman1964: Bradds1965: Bradley1966: C. Russell1967: Alcindor1968: Hayes1969: Alcindor1970: Maravich1971: Carr1972: Walton1973: Walton1974: Walton1975: Thompson1976: May1977: Johnson1978: Lee1979: Bird1980: Aguirre1981: Sampson1982: Sampson1983: Sampson1984: Jordan1985: Mullin1986: Berry1987: D. Robinson1988: Hawkins1989: Ferry1990: Simmons1991: O'Neal1992: Jackson1993: Cheaney1994: G. Robinson1995: Smith1996: AllenvteJohn R. Wooden Men's Player of the Year Award winners1977: M. Johnson1978: P. Ford1979: Bird1980: Griffith1981: Ainge1982: Sampson1983: Sampson1984: Jordan1985: Mullin1986: Berry1987: D. Robinson1988: Manning1989: Elliott1990: Simmons1991: L. Johnson1992: Laettner1993: Cheaney1994: G. Robinson1995: O'Bannon1996: Camby1997: Duncan1998: Jamison1999: Brand2000: Martin2001: Battier2002: Williams2003: T. J. Ford2004: Nelson2005: Bogut2006: Redick2007: Durant2008: Hansbrough2009: Griffin2010: Turner2011: Fredette2012: Davis2013: Burke2014: McDermott2015: Kaminsky2016: Hield2017: Mason III2018: Brunson2019: Williamson2020: Toppin2021: Garza2022: Tshiebwe2023: Edey2024: EdeyvteAtlantic Coast Conference Men's Basketball Player of the Year1954: Hemric 1955: Hemric 1956: Shavlik 1957: Rosenbluth 1958: Brennan 1959: Pucillo 1960: Shaffer 1961: Chappell 1962: Chappell 1963: Heyman 1964: Mullins 1965: Cunningham 1966: Vacendak 1967: Miller 1968: Miller 1969: Roche 1970: Roche 1971: C. Davis 1972: Parkhill 1973: Thompson 1974: Thompson 1975: Thompson 1976: Kupchak 1977: Griffin 1978: Ford 1979: Gminski 1980: King 1981: Sampson 1982: Sampson 1983: Sampson 1984: Jordan 1985: Bias 1986: Bias 1987: Grant 1988: Ferry 1989: Ferry 1990: Scott 1991: Monroe 1992: Laettner 1993: Rogers 1994: Hill 1995: J. Smith 1996: Duncan 1997: Duncan 1998: Jamison 1999: Brand 2000: Carrawell 2001: Battier & Forte 2002: Dixon 2003: Howard 2004: Hodge 2005: Redick 2006: Redick 2007: Dudley 2008: Hansbrough 2009: Lawson 2010: V\u00e1squez 2011: N. Smith2012: Zeller2013: Green & Larkin2014: Warren2015: Okafor2016: Brogdon2017: Jackson2018: Bagley2019: Williamson2020: Jones2021: Wright2022: Williams2023: Wong2024: R. DavisvteACC Athlete of the YearAthlete of the Year1954: Shankle1955: Hemric1956: Sime1957: Rosenbluth1958: Christy1959: Pucillo1960: McGee1961: Gabriel1962: Chappell1963: Heyman1964: Mullins1965: Piccolo1966: Talbott1967: Bryant1968: Miller1969: Quayle1970: Scott1971: McCauley1972: Parkhill1973: Thompson1974: Waldrop1975: Thompson1976: Lucas1977: Ford1978: Ford1979: Nehemiah1980: Shea1981: Shea1982: Worthy1983: Sampson1984: Jordan1985: Surhoff1986: Bias1987: Ingram1988: Ferry1989: FerryMale Athlete of the Year1990: Hines1991: Laettner1992: Laettner1993: C. Ward1994: C. Ward1995: Childress1996: Benson1997: Duncan1998: Jamison1999: Brand2000: Hamilton2001: Battier2002: Dixon2003: Rotelli2004: Rivers2005: May2006: Redick2007: Dix2008: Hansbrough2009: Hill2010: Crotty2011: Makusha2012: Kuechly2013: Jenkins2014: Winston2015: Tomlinson2016: Watson2017: Watson2018: Jackson2019: Williamson2020: Robinson2021: Lawrence2022: Pickett2023: LowderFemale Athlete of the Year1990: Higgins1991: Staley1992: Staley1993: Hamm1994: Smith1995: Venturini1996: Amonte1997: Forbes1998: Webb1999: Parlow2000: Adams2001: Adams2002: Bielik2003: Beard2004: Beard2005: Dostal2006: Infante2007: Harding2008: Tincher2009: Nogueira2010: Engen2011: O'Donnell2012: R. Ward2013: Dunn2014: Thomas2015: Brian2016: Seidel2017: Kent2018: Ogunbowale2019: Hoffman2020: Matson2021: North2022: North2023: Tuohyvte1983 NCAA Men's Basketball Consensus All-AmericansFirst TeamDale EllisPatrick EwingMichael JordanKeith LeeSam PerkinsRalph SampsonWayman TisdaleSecond TeamClyde DrexlerSidney GreenJohn PaxsonSteve StipanovichJon SundvoldDarrell WalkerRandy Wittmanvte1984 NCAA Men's Basketball Consensus All-AmericansFirst TeamPatrick EwingMichael JordanAkeem OlajuwonSam PerkinsWayman TisdaleSecond TeamMichael CageDevin DurrantKeith LeeChris MullinMelvin TurpinLeon WoodvteNorth Carolina Tar Heels men's basketball 1981\u201382 NCAA champions21 Jimmy Black22 Buzz Peterson23 Michael Jordan32 John Brownlee41 Sam Perkins44 Matt Doherty50 Cecil Exum52 James Worthy (MOP)Head coachDean SmithAssistant coachesBill GuthridgeEddie FoglerRoy Williamsvte1984 NBA draftFirst roundHakeem OlajuwonSam BowieMichael JordanSam PerkinsCharles BarkleyMelvin TurpinAlvin RobertsonLancaster GordonOtis ThorpeLeon WoodKevin WillisTim McCormickJay HumphriesMichael CageTerence StansburyJohn StocktonJeff TurnerVern FlemingBernard ThompsonTony CampbellKenny FieldsTom SewellEarl JonesMichael YoungSecond roundDevin DurrantVictor FlemingRon AndersonCory BlackwellStuart GraySteve BurttJay MurphyEric TurnerSteve ColterTony CostnerOthell WilsonCharles JonesBen ColemanCharlie SittonDanny YoungAnthony TeacheyTom SlubyWillie WhiteGreg WiltjerFred ReynoldsGary PlummerJerome KerseyRonnie WilliamsvteNBA Rookie of the Year Award1953: Meineke 1954: Felix1955: Pettit1956: Stokes1957: Heinsohn1958: Sauldsberry1959: Baylor1960: Chamberlain1961: Robertson1962: Bellamy1963: Dischinger1964: Lucas1965: Reed1966: Barry1967: Bing1968: Monroe1969: Unseld1970: Alcindor1971: Cowens & Petrie1972: Wicks1973: McAdoo1974: DiGregorio1975: Wilkes1976: Adams1977: Dantley1978: Davis1979: Ford1980: Bird1981: Griffith1982: Williams1983: Cummings1984: Sampson1985: Jordan1986: Ewing1987: Person1988: Jackson1989: Richmond1990: Robinson1991: Coleman1992: Johnson1993: O'Neal1994: Webber1995: Hill & Kidd1996: Stoudamire1997: Iverson1998: Duncan1999: Carter2000: Brand & Francis2001: Miller2002: Gasol2003: Stoudemire2004: James2005: Okafor2006: Paul2007: Roy2008: Durant2009: Rose2010: Evans2011: Griffin2012: Irving2013: Lillard2014: Carter-Williams2015: Wiggins2016: Towns2017: Brogdon2018: Simmons2019: Don\u010di\u01072020: Morant2021: Ball2022: Barnes2023: BancherovteIBM Award1984: Johnson1985: Jordan1986: Barkley1987: Barkley1988: Barkley1989: Jordan1990: Robinson1991: Robinson1992: Rodman1993: Olajuwon1994: Robinson 1995: Robinson1996: Robinson1997: Hill1998: K. Malone1999: Mutombo2000: O'Neal2001: O'Neal2002: DuncanvteNBA Defensive Player of the Year Award1983: Moncrief1984: Moncrief1985: Eaton1986: Robertson1987: Cooper1988: Jordan1989: Eaton1990: Rodman1991: Rodman1992: Robinson1993: Olajuwon1994: Olajuwon1995: Mutombo1996: Payton1997: Mutombo1998: Mutombo1999: Mourning2000: Mourning2001: Mutombo2002: Wallace2003: Wallace2004: Artest2005: Wallace2006: Wallace2007: Camby2008: Garnett2009: Howard2010: Howard2011: Howard2012: Chandler2013: Gasol2014: Noah2015: Leonard2016: Leonard2017: Green2018: Gobert2019: Gobert2020: Antetokounmpo2021: Gobert2022: Smart2023: Jackson Jr.vteNBA Most Valuable Player Award1956: Pettit1957: Cousy1958: Russell1959: Pettit1960: Chamberlain1961: Russell1962: Russell1963: Russell1964: Robertson1965: Russell1966: Chamberlain1967: Chamberlain1968: Chamberlain1969: Unseld1970: Reed1971: Alcindor1972: Abdul-Jabbar1973: Cowens1974: Abdul-Jabbar1975: McAdoo1976: Abdul-Jabbar1977: Abdul-Jabbar1978: Walton1979: M. Malone1980: Abdul-Jabbar1981: Erving1982: M. Malone1983: M. Malone1984: Bird1985: Bird1986: Bird1987: Johnson1988: Jordan1989: Johnson1990: Johnson1991: Jordan1992: Jordan1993: Barkley1994: Olajuwon1995: Robinson1996: Jordan1997: K. Malone1998: Jordan1999: K. Malone2000: O'Neal2001: Iverson2002: Duncan2003: Duncan2004: Garnett2005: Nash2006: Nash2007: Nowitzki 2008: Bryant2009: James2010: James2011: Rose2012: James2013: James2014: Durant2015: Curry2016: Curry2017: Westbrook2018: Harden2019: Antetokounmpo2020: Antetokounmpo2021: Joki\u01072022: Joki\u01072023: EmbiidvteNBA All-Star Game Kobe Bryant Most Valuable Player Award1951: Macauley1952: Arizin1953: Mikan1954: Cousy1955: Sharman1956: Pettit1957: Cousy1958: Pettit1959: Baylor & Pettit1960: Chamberlain1961: Robertson1962: Pettit1963: Russell1964: Robertson1965: Lucas1966: A. Smith1967: Barry1968: Greer1969: Robertson1970: Reed1971: Wilkens1972: West1973: Cowens1974: Lanier1975: Frazier1976: Bing1977: Erving1978: R. Smith1979: Thompson1980: Gervin1981: Archibald1982: Bird1983: Erving1984: Thomas1985: Sampson1986: Thomas1987: Chambers1988: Jordan1989: Malone1990: Johnson1991: Barkley1992: Johnson1993: Stockton & Malone1994: Pippen1995: Richmond1996: Jordan1997: Rice1998: Jordan1999: No game played2000: O'Neal & Duncan2001: Iverson2002: Bryant2003: Garnett2004: O'Neal2005: Iverson2006: James2007: Bryant2008: James2009: Bryant & O'Neal2010: Wade 2011: Bryant2012: Durant2013: Paul2014: Irving2015: Westbrook2016: Westbrook2017: Davis2018: James2019: Durant2020: Leonard2021: Antetokounmpo2022: Curry2023: Tatum2024: LillardvteSlam Dunk Contest winners1984: Nance1985: Wilkins1986: Webb1987: Jordan1988: Jordan1989: Walker1990: Wilkins1991: Brown1992: Ceballos1993: Miner1994: Rider1995: Miner1996: Barry1997: Bryant2000: Carter2001: Mason2002: Richardson2003: Richardson2004: Jones2005: Smith2006: Robinson2007: Green2008: Howard2009: Robinson2010: Robinson2011: Griffin2012: Evans2013: Ross2014: Wall2015: LaVine2016: LaVine2017: Robinson III2018: Mitchell2019: Diallo2020: Jones Jr.2021: Simons2022: Toppin2023: McClung2024: McClungvteChicago Bulls 1990\u201391 NBA champions2 Hopson5 Paxson10 Armstrong14 Hodges23 Jordan (Finals MVP)24 Cartwright32 Perdue33 Pippen34 King42 Williams53 Levingston54 GrantHead coach: JacksonAssistant coaches: BachCleamonsWinterRegular seasonPlayoffsvteChicago Bulls 1991\u201392 NBA champions5 Paxson10 Armstrong14 Hodges20 Hansen21 King23 Jordan (Finals MVP)24 Cartwright32 Perdue33 Pippen42 Williams53 Levingston54 GrantHead coach: JacksonAssistant coaches: BachCleamonsWinterRegular seasonPlayoffsvteChicago Bulls 1992\u201393 NBA champions5 Paxson6 Tucker10 Armstrong12 Williams20 Walker21 King22 McCray23 Jordan (Finals MVP)24 Cartwright32 Perdue33 Pippen42 Williams45 Nealy54 GrantHead coach JacksonAssistant coaches BachCleamonsWinterRegular seasonPlayoffsvteChicago Bulls 1995\u201396 NBA champions0 Brown7 Kuko\u010d9 Harper13 Longley22 Salley23 Jordan (Finals MVP)25 Kerr30 Buechler33 Pippen34 Wennington35 Caffey53 Edwards91 RodmanHead coach: JacksonAssistant coaches: CleamonsPaxsonRodgersWinterRegular seasonPlayoffsvteChicago Bulls 1996\u201397 NBA champions00 Parish1 Brown7 Kuko\u010d9 Harper13 Longley18 Williams23 Jordan (Finals MVP)25 Kerr30 Buechler33 Pippen34 Wennington35 Caffey91 RodmanHead coach: JacksonAssistant coaches: CartwrightHamblenRodgersWinterRegular seasonPlayoffsvteChicago Bulls 1997\u201398 NBA champions1 Brown7 Kuko\u010d8 Simpkins9 Harper13 Longley22 Booth23 Jordan (Finals MVP)24 Burrell25 Kerr30 Buechler33 Pippen34 Wennington53 Kleine91 RodmanHead coach: JacksonAssistant coaches: CartwrightHamblenRodgersWinterRegular seasonPlayoffsvteNBA Finals Bill Russell Most Valuable Player Award1969: West1970: Reed1971: Alcindor 1972: Chamberlain1973: Reed1974: Havlicek1975: Barry1976: White1977: Walton1978: Unseld1979: D. Johnson1980: M. Johnson1981: Maxwell1982: M. Johnson1983: Malone1984: Bird1985: Abdul-Jabbar1986: Bird1987: M. Johnson1988: Worthy1989: Dumars1990: Thomas1991: Jordan1992: Jordan1993: Jordan1994: Olajuwon1995: Olajuwon1996: Jordan1997: Jordan1998: Jordan1999: Duncan2000: O'Neal2001: O'Neal2002: O'Neal2003: Duncan2004: Billups2005: Duncan2006: Wade2007: Parker2008: Pierce2009: Bryant2010: Bryant2011: Nowitzki2012: James2013: James2014: Leonard2015: Iguodala2016: James2017: Durant2018: Durant2019: Leonard2020: James2021: Antetokounmpo2022: Curry2023: Joki\u0107vteNBA annual scoring leaders1947: Fulks1948: Zaslofsky1949: Mikan1950: Mikan1951: Mikan1952: Arizin1953: Johnston1954: Johnston1955: Johnston1956: Pettit1957: Arizin1958: Yardley1959: Pettit1960: Chamberlain1961: Chamberlain1962: Chamberlain1963: Chamberlain1964: Chamberlain1965: Chamberlain1966: Chamberlain1967: Barry1968: Bing1969: Hayes1970: West1971: Alcindor1972: Abdul-Jabbar1973: Archibald1974: McAdoo1975: McAdoo1976: McAdoo1977: Maravich1978: Gervin1979: Gervin1980: Gervin1981: Dantley1982: Gervin1983: English1984: Dantley1985: King1986: Wilkins1987: Jordan1988: Jordan1989: Jordan1990: Jordan1991: Jordan1992: Jordan1993: Jordan1994: Robinson1995: O'Neal1996: Jordan1997: Jordan1998: Jordan1999: Iverson2000: O'Neal2001: Iverson2002: Iverson2003: McGrady2004: McGrady2005: Iverson2006: Bryant2007: Bryant2008: James2009: Wade2010: Durant2011: Durant2012: Durant2013: Anthony2014: Durant2015: Westbrook2016: Curry2017: Westbrook2018: Harden2019: Harden2020: Harden2021: Curry2022: Embiid2023: Embiid2024: Don\u010di\u0107vteNBA annual steals leaders1974: Steele1975: Barry1976: Watts1977: Buse1978: Lee1979: Carr1980: Richardson1981: Johnson1982: Johnson1983: Richardson1984: R. Green1985: Richardson1986: Robertson1987: Robertson1988: Jordan1989: Stockton1990: Jordan1991: Robertson1992: Stockton1993: Jordan1994: McMillan1995: Pippen1996: Payton1997: Blaylock1998: Blaylock1999: Gill2000: Jones2001: Iverson2002: Iverson2003: Iverson2004: Davis2005: Hughes2006: Wallace2007: Davis2008: Paul2009: Paul2010: Rondo2011: Paul2012: Paul2013: Paul2014: Paul2015: Leonard2016: Curry2017: D. Green2018: Oladipo2019: George2020: Simmons2021: Butler2022: Murray2023: Anunoby2024: FoxvteNBA 50th Anniversary TeamKareem Abdul-JabbarNate ArchibaldPaul ArizinCharles BarkleyRick BarryElgin BaylorDave BingLarry BirdWilt ChamberlainBob CousyDave CowensBilly CunninghamDave DeBusschereClyde DrexlerJulius ErvingPatrick EwingWalt FrazierGeorge GervinHal GreerJohn HavlicekElvin HayesMagic JohnsonSam JonesMichael JordanJerry LucasKarl MaloneMoses MalonePete MaravichKevin McHaleGeorge MikanEarl MonroeHakeem OlajuwonShaquille O'NealRobert ParishBob PettitScottie PippenWillis ReedOscar RobertsonDavid RobinsonBill RussellDolph SchayesBill SharmanJohn StocktonIsiah ThomasNate ThurmondWes UnseldBill WaltonJerry WestLenny WilkensJames WorthyvteNBA 75th Anniversary TeamKareem Abdul-JabbarRay AllenGiannis AntetokounmpoCarmelo AnthonyNate ArchibaldPaul ArizinCharles BarkleyRick BarryElgin BaylorDave BingLarry BirdKobe BryantWilt ChamberlainBob CousyDave CowensBilly CunninghamStephen CurryAnthony DavisDave DeBusschereClyde DrexlerTim DuncanKevin DurantJulius ErvingPatrick EwingWalt FrazierKevin GarnettGeorge GervinHal GreerJames HardenJohn HavlicekElvin HayesAllen IversonLeBron JamesMagic JohnsonSam JonesMichael JordanJason KiddKawhi LeonardDamian LillardJerry LucasKarl MaloneMoses MalonePete MaravichBob McAdooKevin McHaleGeorge MikanReggie MillerEarl MonroeSteve NashDirk NowitzkiHakeem OlajuwonShaquille O'NealRobert ParishChris PaulGary PaytonBob PettitPaul PierceScottie PippenWillis ReedOscar RobertsonDavid RobinsonDennis RodmanBill RussellDolph SchayesBill SharmanJohn StocktonIsiah ThomasNate ThurmondWes UnseldDwyane WadeBill WaltonJerry WestRussell WestbrookLenny WilkensDominique WilkinsJames WorthyvteNaismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame Class of 2009PlayersMichael JordanDavid RobinsonJohn StocktonCoachesJerry SloanC. Vivian StringervteMembers of the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of FamePlayersGuardsR. AllenArchibaldBeckmanBelovBingBlazejowskiBorgmannBraunBrennanBryantCerviCheeksClaytonCooper-DykeCousyDampierDaviesDrexlerDumarsEdwardsEndacottFrazierFriedmanGalisGervinGin\u00f3biliGoodrichGreerGrentzGuerinHammonHansonHardawayHaynesHolmanHyattIsaacsIversonJeannetteJenkinsD. JohnsonM. JohnsonK. JonesS. JonesJordanKiddLiebermanMaravichMarcariMar\u010diulionisMartinMcDermottMcGradyD. McGuireMeyersR. MillerMoncriefMonroeMooreC. MurphyNashPageParkerPaytonPetrovi\u0107PhillipPoseyRichmondRobertsonRodgersRoosmaJ. RussellSchommerScottSedranSharmanK. SmithStaleySteinmetzStocktonSwoopesThomasD. ThompsonVandivierWadeWanzerWeatherspoonWestWestphalJ. WhiteWilkensWoodardWoodenForwardsArizinBarkleyBarryBaylorBirdBoshBoswellBradleyR. BrownCashCatchingsC. CooperCunninghamCurryDalipagi\u0107DandridgeDantleyDeBusschereDehnertDuncanEnglishErvingFosterFulksGaleGarnettGasolGatesGolaHaganHavlicekHawkinsHayesHaywoodHeinsohnHillHowellHudsonL. JacksonG. JohnsonB. JonesKingKora\u0107Kuko\u010dLucasLuisettiK. MaloneMcClainB. McCrackenJ. McCrackenMcGinnisMcHaleMikkelsenC. MillerMullinNowitzkiPettitPiercePippenPollardPullinsRadjaRamseyRodmanSchayesE. SchmidtO. SchmidtStokesC. ThompsonT. ThompsonTwymanWalkerWebberN. WhiteWilkesWilkinsWorthyYardleyCentersAbdul-JabbarBarlowBeatyBellamyChamberlainT. Cooper\u0106osi\u0107CowensCrawfordDanielsDeBernardiDivacDonovanEwingGallatinGilmoreGriffithGruenigHarris-StewartHoubregsIsselJacksonW. JohnsonJohnstonM. KrauseKurlandLanierLeslieLovelletteLapchickMacauleyMacielM. MaloneMcAdooMeneghinMikanMourningS. MurphyMutomboOlajuwonO'NealParishReedRisenRobinsonB. RussellSabonisSampsonSemjonovaSikmaThurmondUnseldWachterWallaceWaltonWashingtonWhalenYaoCoachesAdelmanAlexeevaP. AllenAndersonAuerbachAuriemmaBarmoreBarryBessBlairBloodBoeheimL. BrownCalhounCalipariCannCarlsonCarneseccaCarnevaleCarrilCaseChancellorChaneyConradtCrumDalyDeanD\u00edaz-MiguelDiddleDrakeDriesellFerr\u00e1ndizFitchFitzsimmonsGainesGambaGardnerGazeGillGomelskyGunterHannumHarshmanHaskinsHatchellHeinsohnHickeyHixonHobsonHolzmanHugginsHughesHurleyIbaIzzoP. JacksonJulianKarlKeadyKeaneyKeoganKnightKrzyzewskiKundlaLambertLeonardLewisLitwackLoefflerLonborgMageeMcCutchanMcGrawA. McGuireF. McGuireMcLendonMeanwellMeyerMillerMooreMulkeyNelsonNikoli\u0107NovoselOlsonPitinoPopovichRamsayRichardsonRileyRubiniRuppRushB. RussellSachsSelfSharmanSheltonSloanD. SmithStanleyStevensStringerSummittSuttonTarkanianTaylorTeagueJ. ThompsonTomjanovichVanDerveerWadeWattsWilkensG. WilliamsR. WilliamsWoodenWoolpertWoottenWrightYowContributorsAbbottAckermanAttlesBarksdaleBaumannBeeBiasoneH. BrownW. BrownBunnBussCliftonColangeloCostelloDavidsonDouglasDuerEmbryFaganFisherFleisherGarfinkelGavittGottliebGranikGulickHarrisHarrisonHearnHendersonHeppHickoxHinkleIrishM. JacksonJernstedtR. JonesKennedyKnightJ. KrauseLemonListonLloydLoboMcLendonMokrayMorganMorgenweckNaismithNewellNewtonJ. O'BrienL. O'BrienOlsenPodoloffPorterRavelingReidReinsdorfRipleySandersSapersteinSchabingerSt. JohnStaggStankovi\u0107SteitzSternTaylorThornTowerTresterValvanoVitaleWellsWeltsWilkeWinterZollnerRefereesBavettaEnrightEvansGarretsonHepbronHoytKennedyLeithMihalikNicholsNucatolaQuigleyRudolphShirleyStromTobeyWalshTeams1948\u20131982 Wayland Baptist women's teams1956\u201357 Tennessee A&I State men's team1957\u201358 Tennessee A&I State men's team1958\u201359 Tennessee A&I State men's team1960 United States men's Olympic team1965\u201366 Texas Western men's team1976 United States women's Olympic team1992 United States men's Olympic teamAll-American Red HeadsBuffalo GermansThe First TeamHarlem GlobetrottersImmaculata CollegeNew York RenaissanceOriginal CelticsvteFIBA Hall of Fame inducteesFIBAMembersPlayersAmauryArcainA. BelovS. BelovBerkovichBiraCameronChazalon\u0106osi\u0107CruzDalipagi\u0107DaneuDeliba\u0161i\u0107DivacDonovanDydekEdwardsEpiFasoulasFayeFijalkowskiFurlongGalisA. GazeGiannakisGolomeevGonz\u00e1lezHerreraHor\u00e1kov\u00e1Jean-JacquesJordan\u0141opatkaKi\u0107anovi\u0107Kora\u0107Kropil\u00e1kKuko\u010dMarcariMar\u010diulionisMart\u00ednMarzoratiMeneghinMeyersMillerMogliaMourningMujanovi\u0107NashN\u00e9methO'NealObertoOlajuwonOrtizPaulaPaulauskasParkPetrovi\u0107RagaRigaudeauRobertsonRobinsonRodr\u00edguezRonchettiRussellSabonisSakoSchmidtSchrempfSemjonovaSlavni\u0107StoyanovaTarakanovTimmsTkachenkoValtersVolkovVoynovaWardaZassoulskayaZdovcZhengZ\u00eddekCoachesAlekseyevaCanavesiDalyD\u00edaz-MiguelDonohueFerr\u00e1ndizL. GazeA. GomelskyE. GomelskyHejkov\u00e1IbaIvkovi\u0107KanelaKondrashinMagnanoMaherMessinaNewellNikoli\u0107NovoselPe\u0161i\u0107PrimoRubiniSmithStirlingSummittTanjevi\u0107VanDerveerVasojevi\u0107YowZuoyun\u017deravicaContributorsFounding Federations: ArgentineCzechoslovakianGreekItalianLatvianPortugueseRomanianSwissAiraldi RivarolaAshryAtakolBouffardBusnelCalvoCarneiroDos ReisGreimHeppJonesKillianKliegerKoz\u0142owskiL\u00f3pezMart\u00ednNaismithOttoPitzlPopovi\u0107RamsaySamaranch\u0160aperSaportaScuriSeguro de LunaSemashkoS\u00e8ye MoreauStankovi\u0107SteitzSternUedaVitaleWahbyYoonTechnical officialsArabadjianBainBelo\u0161evi\u0107BlanchardDimouHopenhaymKassaiKostinLazarovPfeutiRaeReverberiRigasRighettoTeams1992 USA Men's \"Dream Team\"vteUnited States men's basketball squad \u2013 1983 Pan American Games \u2013 Gold medal4\u00a0Cage5\u00a0Jordan6\u00a0Master7\u00a0Mullin8\u00a0Perkins9\u00a0Pinckney10\u00a0Price11\u00a0Reynolds12\u00a0Sitton13\u00a0Stokes14\u00a0Tisdale15\u00a0WoodCoach:\u00a0HartmanvteUnited States men's basketball squad \u2013 1984 Summer Olympics \u2013 Gold medal4\u00a0Alford5\u00a0Wood6\u00a0Ewing7\u00a0Fleming8\u00a0Robertson9\u00a0Jordan10\u00a0Kleine11\u00a0Koncak12\u00a0Tisdale13\u00a0Mullin14\u00a0Perkins15\u00a0TurnerCoach:\u00a0KnightvteUnited States squad \u2013 1992 Tournament of the Americas \u2013 Gold medal4\u00a0Laettner5\u00a0Robinson6\u00a0Ewing7\u00a0Bird8\u00a0Pippen9\u00a0Jordan10\u00a0Drexler11\u00a0Malone12\u00a0Stockton13\u00a0Mullin14\u00a0Barkley15\u00a0JohnsonCoach:\u00a0DalyvteUnited States men's basketball squad \u2013 1992 Summer Olympics \u2013 Gold medal4\u00a0Laettner5\u00a0Robinson6\u00a0Ewing7\u00a0Bird8\u00a0Pippen9\u00a0Jordan10\u00a0Drexler11\u00a0Malone12\u00a0Stockton13\u00a0Mullin14\u00a0Barkley15\u00a0JohnsonCoach:\u00a0DalyvteSports Illustrated Sportsperson of the Year1954: Roger Bannister1955: Johnny Podres1956: Bobby Morrow1957: Stan Musial1958: Rafer Johnson1959: Ingemar Johansson1960: Arnold Palmer1961: Jerry Lucas1962: Terry Baker1963: Pete Rozelle1964: Ken Venturi1965: Sandy Koufax1966: Jim Ryun1967: Carl Yastrzemski1968: Bill Russell1969: Tom Seaver1970: Bobby Orr1971: Lee Trevino1972: Billie Jean King & John Wooden1973: Jackie Stewart1974: Muhammad Ali1975: Pete Rose1976: Chris Evert1977: Steve Cauthen1978: Jack Nicklaus1979: Terry Bradshaw & Willie Stargell1980: U.S. Olympic Hockey Team1981: Sugar Ray Leonard1982: Wayne Gretzky1983: Mary Decker1984: Edwin Moses & Mary Lou Retton1985: Kareem Abdul-Jabbar1986: Joe Paterno1987: Bob Bourne, Judi Brown King, Kipchoge Keino, Dale Murphy, Chip Rives, Patty Sheehan, Rory Sparrow, & Reggie Williams1988: Orel Hershiser1989: Greg LeMond1990: Joe Montana1991: Michael Jordan1992: Arthur Ashe1993: Don Shula1994: Bonnie Blair & Johann Olav Koss1995: Cal Ripken Jr.1996: Tiger Woods1997: Dean Smith1998: Mark McGwire & Sammy Sosa1999: U.S. Women's Soccer Team2000: Tiger Woods2001: Curt Schilling & Randy Johnson2002: Lance Armstrong2003: David Robinson & Tim Duncan2004: Boston Red Sox2005: Tom Brady2006: Dwyane Wade2007: Brett Favre2008: Michael Phelps2009: Derek Jeter2010: Drew Brees2011: Mike Krzyzewski & Pat Summitt2012: LeBron James2013: Peyton Manning2014: Madison Bumgarner2015: Serena Williams2016: LeBron James2017: Jos\u00e9 Altuve & J. J. Watt2018: Golden State Warriors2019: Megan Rapinoe2020: Laurent Duvernay-Tardif, LeBron James, Patrick Mahomes, Naomi Osaka, & Breanna Stewart2021: Tom Brady2022: Stephen Curry2023: Deion SandersvteSporting News Sportsman / Pro Athlete of the Year1968: Denny McLain1969: Tom Seaver1970: John Wooden1971: Lee Trevino1972: Charlie Finley1973: O. J. Simpson1974: Lou Brock1975: Archie Griffin1976: Larry O'Brien1977: Steve Cauthen1978: Ron Guidry1979: Willie Stargell1980: George Brett1981: Wayne Gretzky1982: Whitey Herzog1983: Bowie Kuhn1984: Peter Ueberroth1985: Pete Rose1986: Larry Bird1987: None1988: Jackie Joyner-Kersee1989: Joe Montana1990: Nolan Ryan1991: Michael Jordan1992: Mike Krzyzewski1993: Cito Gaston & Pat Gillick1994: Emmitt Smith1995: Cal Ripken Jr.1996: Joe Torre1997: Mark McGwire1998: Mark McGwire & Sammy Sosa1999: New York Yankees2000: Marshall Faulk & Kurt Warner2001: Curt Schilling2002: Tyrone Willingham2003: Dick Vermeil & Jack McKeon2004: Tom Brady2005: Matt Leinart2006: Dwyane Wade2007: Tom Brady2008: Eli Manning2009: Mariano Rivera2010: Roy Halladay2011: Aaron Rodgers2012: LeBron JamesvteUSA Basketball Male Athlete of the Year1980: Thomas1981: Boyle1982: Rivers1983: Jordan1984: Jordan & Perkins1985: Person1986: Robinson1987: Manning1988: Majerle1989: Johnson1990: Mourning1991: Laettner1992: U.S. men's national team1993: Finley1994: O'Neal1995: Allen1996: Pippen1997: Boykins1998: Brand1999: Payton2000: Mourning2001: Duhon2002: Miller2003: Duncan2004: May & Paul2005: Williams2006: Anthony2007: Kidd2008: U.S. men's national team2009: McAdoo2010: Durant2011: Parker2012: James2013: Gordon2014: Irving2015: Brunson2016: Anthony & Durant2017: Warney2018: Hearn2019: Hummel2020: None2021: Durant2022: Flagg2023: PeatvteAssociated Press Male Athlete of the Year1931: Pepper Martin1932: Gene Sarazen1933: Carl Hubbell1934: Dizzy Dean1935: Joe Louis1936: Jesse Owens1937: Don Budge1938: Don Budge1939: Nile Kinnick1940: Tom Harmon1941: Joe DiMaggio1942: Frank Sinkwich1943: Gunder H\u00e4gg1944: Byron Nelson1945: Byron Nelson1946: Glenn Davis1947: Johnny Lujack1948: Lou Boudreau1949: Leon Hart1950: Jim Konstanty1951: Dick Kazmaier1952: Bob Mathias1953: Ben Hogan1954: Willie Mays1955: Howard Cassady1956: Mickey Mantle1957: Ted Williams1958: Herb Elliott1959: Ingemar Johansson1960: Rafer Johnson1961: Roger Maris1962: Maury Wills1963: Sandy Koufax1964: Don Schollander1965: Sandy Koufax1966: Frank Robinson1967: Carl Yastrzemski1968: Denny McLain1969: Tom Seaver1970: George Blanda1971: Lee Trevino1972: Mark Spitz1973: O. J. Simpson1974: Muhammad Ali1975: Fred Lynn1976: Bruce Jenner1977: Steve Cauthen1978: Ron Guidry1979: Willie Stargell1980: U.S. Olympic Hockey Team1981: John McEnroe1982: Wayne Gretzky1983: Carl Lewis1984: Carl Lewis1985: Dwight Gooden1986: Larry Bird1987: Ben Johnson1988: Orel Hershiser1989: Joe Montana1990: Joe Montana1991: Michael Jordan1992: Michael Jordan1993: Michael Jordan1994: George Foreman1995: Cal Ripken Jr.1996: Michael Johnson1997: Tiger Woods1998: Mark McGwire1999: Tiger Woods2000: Tiger Woods2001: Barry Bonds2002: Lance Armstrong2003: Lance Armstrong2004: Lance Armstrong2005: Lance Armstrong2006: Tiger Woods2007: Tom Brady2008: Michael Phelps2009: Jimmie Johnson2010: Drew Brees2011: Aaron Rodgers2012: Michael Phelps2013: LeBron James2014: Madison Bumgarner2015: Stephen Curry2016: LeBron James2017: Jos\u00e9 Altuve2018: LeBron James2019: Kawhi Leonard2020: LeBron James2021: Shohei Ohtani2022: Aaron Judge2023: Shohei OhtanivteL'\u00c9quipe Champion of ChampionsOriginal award1980: Eric Heiden1981: Sebastian Coe1982: Paolo Rossi1983: Carl Lewis1984: Carl Lewis1985: Sergey Bubka1986: Diego Maradona1987: Ben Johnson1988: Florence Griffith Joyner1989: Greg LeMond1990: Ayrton Senna1991: Carl Lewis1992: Michael Jordan1993: Noureddine Morceli1994: Rom\u00e1rio1995: Jonathan Edwards1996: Michael Johnson1997: Sergey Bubka1998: Zinedine Zidane1999: Andre Agassi2000: Tiger Woods2001: Michael Schumacher2002: Michael Schumacher2003: Michael Schumacher2004: Hicham El Guerrouj2005: Roger Federer2006: Roger Federer2007: Roger Federer2008: Usain Bolt2009: Usain Bolt2010: Rafael Nadal2011: Lionel MessiMale and femaleawards separatedMale award2012: Usain Bolt2013: Rafael Nadal2014: Renaud Lavillenie2015: Usain Bolt2016: Usain Bolt2017: Roger Federer & Rafael Nadal2018: Marcel Hirscher2019: Rafael Nadal2020: Lewis Hamilton2021: Novak Djokovic2022: Lionel Messi2023: Novak DjokovicFemale award2012: Serena Williams2013: Serena Williams2014: Katie Ledecky2015: Serena Williams2016: Simone Biles2017: Katie Ledecky2018: Simone Biles2019: Simone Biles2020: Marte Olsbu R\u00f8iseland2021: Elaine Thompson-Herah2022: Iga \u015awi\u0105tek2023: Simone BilesvteBest Male Athlete ESPY Award winners1993: Jordan1994: Bonds1995: Young1996: Ripken Jr.1997: Johnson1998: Woods / Griffey Jr.1999: McGwire2000: Woods2001: Woods2002: Woods2003: Armstrong2004: Armstrong2005: Armstrong2006: Armstrong2007: Tomlinson2008: Woods2009: Phelps2010: Brees2011: Nowitzki2012: James2013: James2014: Durant2015: Curry2016: James2017: Westbrook2018: Ovechkin2019: Antetokounmpo2020: Award not given2021: Brady2022: OhtanivteChicago BullsFounded in 1966Based in Chicago, IllinoisFranchiseAll-time rosterDraft history1966RecordsHead coachesSeasonsCurrent seasonArenasInternational AmphitheatreChicago StadiumUnited CenterPersonnelOwner(s)Jerry ReinsdorfPresidentMichael ReinsdorfGeneral managerMarc EversleyHead coachBilly DonovanG League affiliateWindy City BullsRetired numbers4102333NBA championships199119921993199619971998RivalriesCleveland CavaliersDetroit PistonsNew York KnicksCulture and loreBroadcastersAir JordanJumpmanTommy EdwardsRay ClayBenny the BullDisputed Foul Against Scottie Pippen\"Sirius\"\"I Believe I Can Fly\"\"Sweet Home Chicago\"Bill Swerski's SuperfansJordan RulesTriangle offenseAshland Green/Pink Line StationTex WinterThe Spirit (Michael Jordan statue)Phantom Buzzer GameThe ShotNBA championship riotsBulls vs Lakers and the NBA PlayoffsBulls vs. Blazers and the NBA PlayoffsTrent Tucker RuleThe Calhoun Shot72\u201310Michael Jordan's last shotSpace JamThe Last DancevteCharlotte HornetsFounded in 1988Formerly the Charlotte Bobcats (2004\u20132014)Based in Charlotte, North CarolinaFranchiseHistoryAll-time rosterDraft history19882004RecordsHead coachesSeasonsCurrent seasonArenasCharlotte ColiseumSpectrum CenterPersonnelOwner(s)Gabe Plotkin and Rick SchnallPresidentFred WhitfieldGeneral managerMitch KupchakHead coachvacantG League affiliateGreensboro SwarmRetired numbers13Culture and loreBroadcastersBuzz CityGeorge ShinnHugoCharlotte Honey Bees\"Grandmama\"\"Zo\"Patrick K. DoughtyDancing BarryvteMiami HeatFounded in 1988Based in Miami, FloridaFranchiseHistoryAll-time rosterDraft history1988RecordsHead coachesSeasonsCurrent seasonArenasMiami ArenaKaseya CenterPersonnelOwner(s)Micky ArisonPresidentPat RileyGeneral managerAndy ElisburgHead coachErik SpoelstraG League affiliateSioux Falls SkyforceRetired numbers131023323340NBA championships200620122013RivalriesBoston CelticsIndiana PacersNew York KnicksOrlando MagicCulture and loreBroadcastersMicky ArisonPat RileyMichael BaiamonteBurnie\"Bring Em Out\"\"The Heat Is On\"The Calhoun ShotShaq\u2013Kobe feudThe DecisionThe Big Three27 in a rowThe ShotBig Face Coffee Category Commonsvte23XI RacingHeadquarters: Mooresville, North CarolinaPersonnelMichael JordanDenny HamlinSteve LaulettaMike WheelerDave RogersKurt BuschNASCAR Cup SeriesDrivers(23) Bubba Wallace(45) Tyler Reddick(50) Kamui Kobayashi / TBA (part-time)Crew chiefs(23) Bootie Barker(45) Billy Scott(50) Julian PenaReserve driverCorey HeimeNASCAR Coca-Cola iRacing Series(23) Mitchell deJong(45) Keegan LeahyFormer driversKurt BuschTy DillonTy GibbsDaniel HemricJohn Hunter NemechekTravis PastranaNASCAR iRacing Championships2021 (Leahy)Partnerships and affiliationsJoe Gibbs RacingToyota Racing DevelopmentvteNAACP Image Award \u2013 Jackie Robinson Sports AwardWilma Rudolph / Harlem Globetrotters (1988)Jackie Joyner-Kersee / Sugar Ray Robinson (1989)Roy Campanella / Anita DeFrantz (1990)Magic Johnson (1992)Eddie Robinson (1996)Jim Brown (1997)Michael Jordan (1999)LeBron James (2017)Stephen Curry / WNBA Players Association (2021)vteBest NBA Player ESPY AwardMichael Jordan (1993)Charles Barkley (1994)Hakeem Olajuwon (1995)Hakeem Olajuwon (1996)Michael Jordan (1997)Michael Jordan (1998)Michael Jordan (1999)Tim Duncan (2000)Shaquille O'Neal (2001)Shaquille O'Neal (2002)Tim Duncan (2003)Kevin Garnett (2004)Steve Nash (2005)Dwyane Wade (2006)LeBron James (2007)Kobe Bryant (2008)LeBron James (2009)Kobe Bryant (2010)Dirk Nowitzki (2011)LeBron James (2012)LeBron James (2013)Kevin Durant (2014)Stephen Curry (2015)LeBron James (2016)LeBron James (2017)LeBron James (2018)Giannis Antetokounmpo (2019)Not awarded (2020)Stephen Curry (2021)Stephen Curry (2022)Nikola Joki\u0107 (2023)vteSpace JamFeature filmsSpace Jam (1996)A New Legacy (2021)MusicSpace Jam\"I Believe I Can Fly\"\"Hit 'Em High (The Monstars' Anthem)\"\"For You I Will\"\"I Turn to You\"A New LegacyOther mediaVideo gamePinball gameBarkley, Shut Up and Jam: GaidenMultiVersusRelatedLola BunnyMichael JordanLeBron JamesLooney TunesTeen Titans Go! See Space Jam CategoryPortals:\u00a0Basketball\u00a0Biography\u00a0SportsAuthority control databases InternationalFASTISNIVIAFNationalNorwayChileSpainFranceBnF dataGermanyIsraelUnited StatesLatviaTaiwanJapanCzech RepublicGreeceCroatiaNetherlandsPolandRussiaAcademicsCiNiiArtistsMusicBrainzPeopleDeutsche SynchronkarteiTroveOtherSNACIdRefRetrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Michael_Jordan&oldid=1221783531\""},{"link": "https://en.wikipedia.org//wiki/Chicago_Bulls", "content": "National Basketball Association team in Chicago, IllinoisFor other uses, see Chicago Bulls (disambiguation).Chicago Bulls 2023\u201324 Chicago Bulls seasonConferenceEasternDivisionCentralFounded1966HistoryChicago Bulls1966\u2013present[1][2][3]ArenaUnited CenterLocationChicago, IllinoisTeam colorsRed, black, white[4][5][6]\u00a0 \u00a0 \u00a0Main sponsorMotorola Mobility[7]PresidentMichael ReinsdorfGeneral managerMarc Eversley[8]Head coachBilly DonovanOwnershipJerry ReinsdorfAffiliation(s)Windy City BullsChampionships6 (1991, 1992, 1993, 1996, 1997, 1998)Conference titles6 (1991, 1992, 1993, 1996, 1997, 1998)Division titles9 (1975, 1991, 1992, 1993, 1996, 1997, 1998, 2011, 2012)Retired numbers4 (4, 10, 23, 33)Websitewww.nba.com/bullsAssociationIconStatementThe Chicago Bulls are an American professional basketball team based in Chicago. The Bulls compete in the National Basketball Association (NBA) as a member of the Central Division of the Eastern Conference. The team was founded on January 16, 1966, and played its first game during the 1966\u201367 NBA season.[9] The Bulls play their home games at the United Center, an arena on Chicago's West Side.The Bulls saw their greatest success during the 1990s when they played a major part in popularizing the NBA worldwide. They are known for having one of the NBA's greatest dynasties, winning six NBA championships between 1991 and 1998 with two three-peats. All six of their championship teams were led by Hall of Famers Michael Jordan, Scottie Pippen, and coach Phil Jackson. The Bulls are the only NBA franchise to win multiple championships while never losing an NBA Finals series in their history.[10]The Bulls won 72 games during the 1995\u201396 season, setting an NBA record that stood until the Golden State Warriors won 73 games during the 2015\u201316 season. The Bulls were the first team in NBA history to win 70 games or more in a single season, and the only NBA franchise to do so until the 2015\u201316 Warriors.[11]Since 1998, the Bulls have failed to regain their former success. The franchise struggled throughout the 2000s, but showed promise in the early 2010s led by Derrick Rose and Joakim Noah, culminating in back-to-back seasons above .732 in 2010\u201311 and 2011\u201312. An ACL tear suffered by Rose and subsequent trades of key players triggered a rebuild, culminating in the current lineup built around All-Stars Zach LaVine, DeMar DeRozan and Nikola Vu\u010devi\u0107. Jordan and Rose have won the NBA Most Valuable Player Award while playing for the Bulls, for a total of six MVP awards. The Bulls share rivalries with the Cleveland Cavaliers, Detroit Pistons, Miami Heat, and the New York Knicks. The Bulls' rivalry with the Pistons was highlighted heavily during the late 1980s and early 1990s. Outside of basketball, the Chicago Bulls are also known for their community work through their charity department which provides youth and not-for-profit organizations with tickets to games and merchandise.Franchise history[edit]1966\u20131975: Team creation and early success[edit]This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2023) (Learn how and when to remove this message)On January 16, 1966, Chicago was granted a National Basketball Association (NBA) franchise to be called the Bulls. The Chicago Bulls became the third NBA franchise in the city, after the Chicago Stags (1946\u20131950) and the Chicago Packers/Zephyrs (1961\u20131963, now the Washington Wizards). The Bulls' founder, Dick Klein, was the Bulls' only owner to ever play professional basketball (for the Chicago American Gears). He served as the Bulls' general manager and president in their initial years. After the 1966 NBA Expansion Draft, the newly founded Chicago Bulls were allowed to acquire players from the previously established teams in the league for the upcoming 1966\u201367 season. They would be coached by Chicagoan and former NBA All-Star Johnny \"Red\" Kerr.[12] That season, the team played their first game in franchise history on October 15.[12] Played on the road, their first game was an upset victory over the St. Louis Hawks.[12] They went on to post a 33\u201348 record, the best by an expansion team in NBA history. Led by guards Guy Rodgers and Jerry Sloan, and forward Bob Boozer, the Bulls qualified for the playoffs, the only NBA team to do so in their inaugural season.[12] Kerr received Coach of the Year honors for the season.[12] Rodgers and Sloan were named All-Stars during the season, with the former leading the league in assists.The 1969\u201370 Chicago BullsIn their first season, the Bulls played their home games at the International Amphitheatre, before moving to Chicago Stadium.Fan interest was diminishing after four seasons, with one game in the 1967\u201368 season having an official attendance of 891 and some games being played in Kansas City. In 1969, Klein dropped out of the general manager job and hired Pat Williams, who as the Philadelphia 76ers' business manager created promotions that helped the team become third in attendance the previous season. Williams revamped the team roster, acquiring Chet Walker from Philadelphia in exchange for Jim Washington and drafting Norm Van Lier \u2013 who was traded to the Cincinnati Royals and only joined the Bulls in 1971 \u2013 while also investing in promotion, with actions such as creating mascot Benny the Bull. The Bulls under Williams and head coach Dick Motta qualified for four straight playoffs and had attendances grow to over 10,000.[13] In 1972, the Bulls set a franchise win\u2013loss record at 57 wins and 25 losses. During the 1970s, the Bulls relied on Jerry Sloan, forwards Bob Love and Chet Walker, point guard Norm Van Lier, and centers Clifford Ray and Tom Boerwinkle. The team made the conference finals in 1975 but lost to the eventual champions, the Golden State Warriors, 4 games to 3.After four 50-win seasons, Williams returned to Philadelphia, and Motta decided to take on the role of general manager as well. The Bulls ended up declining, winning only 24 games in the 1975\u201376 season. Motta was fired and replaced by Ed Badger.[13]1976\u20131984: Gilmore and Theus duo[edit]This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this message)Gilmore in 1977Klein sold the Bulls to the Wirtz family, longtime owners of the Chicago Blackhawks. Indifferent to NBA basketball, the new ownership group infamously implemented a shoestring budget, putting little time and investment into improving the team.Artis Gilmore, acquired in the ABA dispersal draft in 1976, led a Bulls squad which included guard Reggie Theus, forward David Greenwood and forward Orlando Woolridge.In 1979, the Bulls lost a coin flip for the right to select first in the NBA draft (Rod Thorn, the Bulls' general manager, called \"heads\"). Had the Bulls won the toss, they would have selected Magic Johnson; instead, they selected David Greenwood with the second pick. The Los Angeles Lakers selected Johnson with the pick acquired from the New Orleans Jazz, who traded the selection for Gail Goodrich.After Gilmore was traded to the San Antonio Spurs for center Dave Corzine, the Bulls employed a high-powered offense centered on Theus, and which soon included guards Quintin Dailey and Ennis Whatley. However, with continued dismal results, the Bulls decided to change direction, trading Theus to the Kansas City Kings during the 1983\u201384 season. Attendance began to dwindle, with the Wirtz family looking to sell to ownership groups interested in moving the team out of Chicago, before selling to local ownership.1984\u20131993: Michael Jordan era begins[edit]This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2023) (Learn how and when to remove this message)Michael Jordan was drafted third overall by the Bulls in 1984. He won six championships and six Finals MVPs for Chicago.In the summer of 1984, the Bulls had the third pick of the 1984 NBA draft, after Houston and Portland. The Rockets selected Hakeem Olajuwon, the Blazers picked Sam Bowie and the Bulls chose shooting guard Michael Jordan. The team, with new management in owner Jerry Reinsdorf and general manager Jerry Krause, decided to rebuild around Jordan. Jordan set franchise records during his rookie campaign for scoring (third in the league) and steals (fourth), and led the Bulls back to the playoffs, where they lost in four games to the Milwaukee Bucks. For his efforts, he was rewarded with a selection to the All-NBA Second Team and the NBA Rookie of the Year Award.In the following off-season, the team acquired point guard John Paxson and on draft day traded with the Cavaliers for the rights to power forward Charles Oakley. Along with Jordan and center Dave Corzine, they provided much of the Bulls' offense for the next two years. After suffering a broken foot early in the 1985\u201386 season, Jordan finished second on the team to Woolridge in scoring. Jordan returned for the playoffs, and led the eighth-place Bulls against the 67\u201315 Boston Celtics, led by Larry Bird. At the time, the Bulls had the fifth-worst record of any team to qualify for the playoffs in NBA history.[14] Though the Bulls were swept, Jordan recorded a playoff single-game record 63 points in Game 2 (which still stands to this day), prompting Bird to call him 'God disguised as Michael Jordan.'In the 1986\u201387 season, Jordan continued his assault on the record books, leading the league in scoring with 37.1 points per game and becoming the first Bull named to the All-NBA First Team. The Bulls finished 40\u201342, which was good enough to qualify them for the playoffs. However, they were again swept by the Celtics in the playoffs.In the 1987 draft, to address their lack of depth, Krause selected center Olden Polynice eighth overall and power forward Horace Grant 10th overall, then sent Polynice to Seattle in a draft-day trade for the fifth selection, small forward Scottie Pippen. With Paxson and Jordan in the backcourt, Brad Sellers and Oakley at the forward spots, Corzine anchoring center, and rookies Pippen and Grant coming off the bench, the Bulls won 50 games and advanced to the Eastern Conference semifinals, where they were beaten by the eventual Eastern Conference Champions Detroit Pistons in five games. For his efforts, Jordan was named NBA Most Valuable Player, an award he would win four more times over his career. The 1987\u201388 season would also mark the start of the Pistons-Bulls rivalry which was formed from 1988 to 1991.The 1988\u201389 season marked a second straight year of major off-season moves. Power forward Charles Oakley, who had led the league in total rebounds in both 1987 and 1988, was traded on the eve of the 1988 NBA draft to the New York Knicks along with a first-round draft pick used by the Knicks to select Rod Strickland for center Bill Cartwright and a first-round pick, which the Bulls used to obtain center Will Perdue. In addition, the Bulls acquired three-point shooter Craig Hodges from Phoenix. The new starting lineup of Paxson, Jordan, Pippen, Grant, and Cartwright took some time to mesh, winning fewer games than the previous season, but made it all the way to the Eastern Conference Finals, where they were defeated in six games by the NBA champion Pistons.In 1989\u201390, Jordan led the league in scoring for the fourth straight season and was joined on the all-star squad for the first time by Pippen. There was also a major change during the off-season, where head coach Doug Collins was replaced by assistant coach Phil Jackson. The Bulls also picked up rookie center Stacey King and rookie point guard B. J. Armstrong in the 1989 draft. With these additional players and the previous year's starting five, the Bulls again made it to the Conference Finals and pushed the Pistons to seven games before being eliminated for the third straight year, the Pistons going on to repeat as NBA champions.1990\u20131993: First championship three-peat[edit]This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (December 2023) (Learn how and when to remove this message)In the 1990\u201391 season, the Bulls recorded a then-franchise record 61 wins, and romped through the playoffs, where they swept the Knicks in the first round, defeated the Philadelphia 76ers in the semifinals, and then swept the defending champion Pistons in the Conference Finals, then winning the NBA Finals in five games over the Magic Johnson-led Los Angeles Lakers.The Bulls won their second straight title in 1992 after racking up another franchise record for wins with 67. They swept the Miami Heat in the first round, defeated the Knicks in seven games in the second round, then the Cleveland Cavaliers in six games in the third round, advancing to the Finals for the second year in a row where they defeated the Clyde Drexler-led Portland Trail Blazers in six games.In 1993, the Bulls won their third consecutive championship by defeating the Atlanta Hawks, Cleveland Cavaliers and New York Knicks in the first three rounds of the playoffs and then defeating regular season MVP Charles Barkley and the Phoenix Suns in the Finals, with Paxson's three-pointer with 3.9 seconds left giving them a 99\u201398 victory in Game 6 in Phoenix.1993\u20131995: Jordan's first retirement[edit]This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this message)United CenterOn October 6, 1993, Michael Jordan shocked the basketball community by announcing his retirement, three months after his father's murder. The Bulls were then led by Scottie Pippen, who established himself as one of the top players in the league by winning the 1994 All-Star MVP. He received help from Horace Grant and B. J. Armstrong, who were named to their first all-star games. The three were assisted by Cartwright, Perdue, shooting guard Pete Myers, and Croatian rookie forward Toni Kuko\u010d. Despite the Bulls winning 55 games during the 1993\u201394 season, they were beaten in seven games by the Knicks in the second round of the playoffs, after a controversial foul call by referee Hue Hollins in game 5 of that series. The Knicks eventually reached the NBA Finals that year, but lost to the Houston Rockets. The Bulls opened the 1994\u201395 season by leaving their home of 27 years, Chicago Stadium, and moving into their current home, the United Center.In 1994, the Bulls lost Grant, Cartwright and Scott Williams to free agency, and John Paxson to retirement, but picked up shooting guard Ron Harper, the seeming heir apparent to Jordan in assistant coach Tex Winter's triple-post offense, and small-forward Jud Buechler. The Bulls started Armstrong and Harper in the backcourt, Pippen and Kuko\u010d at the forward spots, and Perdue at center. They also had sharpshooter Steve Kerr, whom they acquired via free agency before the 1993\u201394 season, Myers, and centers Luc Longley (acquired via trade in 1994 from the Minnesota Timberwolves) and Bill Wennington. However, the Bulls struggled during the season, and on March 18, 1995, they received the news that Michael Jordan was coming out of retirement. He scored 55 points against the Knicks in only his fifth game back, and led the Bulls to the fifth seed in the playoffs, where they defeated the Charlotte Hornets. However, Jordan and the Bulls were unable to overcome the eventual Eastern Conference champion Orlando Magic, which included Horace Grant, Penny Hardaway, and Shaquille O'Neal.In the off-season, the Bulls lost Armstrong in the expansion draft, and Krause traded Perdue to the San Antonio Spurs for rebounding specialist Dennis Rodman, who had won the past four rebounding titles, and who had also been a member of the Detroit Pistons' \"Bad Boys\" squad that served as the Bulls' chief nemesis in the late 1980s.1995\u20131998: Return of Michael Jordan and second championship three-peat[edit]Michael JordanScottie PippenWith a lineup of Jordan, Pippen, Rodman, Harper and Longley, and perhaps the league's best bench in Steve Kerr, Kuko\u010d, Wennington, Buechler, and guard Randy Brown, the Bulls were seen as the team to win again for the NBA Finals.The Bulls started their 1995\u201396 campaign with a 105\u201391 win over the visiting Hornets. In that game, Michael Jordan recorded 42 points, 6 rebounds and 7 assists for the Bulls.[15] The next game, they were up against the Boston Celtics. The Bulls scored 35 points in the third quarter as they pull away against the Celtics, 107\u201385. Six Bulls players scored in double figures in this win.[16] The 1995\u201396 Bulls posted one of the best single-season improvements in league history and the best single-season record at that time, moving from 47\u201335 to 72\u201310, becoming the first NBA team to win 70 or more games.[17] Jordan won his eighth scoring title, and Rodman his fifth straight rebounding title, while Kerr finished second in the league in three-point shooting percentage. Jordan garnered the elusive triple crown with the NBA MVP, NBA All-Star Game MVP, and NBA Finals MVP. Krause was named NBA Executive of the Year, Jackson Coach of the Year, and Kuko\u010d the Sixth Man of the Year. Both Pippen and Jordan made the All-NBA First Team, and Jordan, Pippen, and Rodman made the All-Defensive First Team, making the Bulls one of several teams in NBA history with three players on the All-Defensive First Team.[18]President Bill Clinton honoring the Chicago Bulls in 1997In addition, the 1995\u201396 team holds several other records, including the best road record in a standard 41 road-game season (33\u20138), the all-time best start by a team (41\u20133), and the best start at home (37\u20130). The Bulls also posted the second-best home record in history (39\u20132), behind only the 1985\u201386 Celtics 40\u20131 home mark. The team triumphed over the Miami Heat in the first round, the New York Knicks in the second round, the Orlando Magic in the Eastern Conference Finals and finally Gary Payton, Shawn Kemp and the Seattle SuperSonics for their fourth title. The 1995\u201396 Chicago Bulls are widely regarded as one of the greatest teams in the history of basketball.[19]Bulls head coach Phil Jackson consulting Michael Jordan in 1997In the 1996\u201397 season, the Bulls missed out on a second consecutive 70-win season by losing their final two games to finish 69\u201313. They repeated their home dominance, going 39\u20132 at the United Center.[20] The Bulls capped the season by defeating the Bullets, Hawks and Heat in the first three rounds of the playoffs en route to winning their fifth NBA championship over John Stockton, Karl Malone and the Utah Jazz. Jordan earned his second straight and ninth career scoring title, while Rodman earned his sixth straight rebounding title. Jordan and Pippen, along with Robert Parish, who was a member of the Bulls at the time, were also honored as members of the 50 greatest players of all time with the NBA celebrating its 50th season.[21] Parish, whose single season with the Bulls would be his last year in the league, was nominated for his stellar career with the Boston Celtics.[22]The 1997\u201398 season was one of turmoil for the NBA champion Bulls.[23] Many speculated this would be Michael Jordan's final season with the team.[23] Phil Jackson's future with the team was also questionable, as his relationship with team general manager Jerry Krause was one of growing tension. Scottie Pippen was looking for a significant contract extension that he thought he deserved, but was not getting from the organization. In spite of the turmoil that surrounded the Bulls, they still had a remarkable season, with a final regular season record of 62\u201320. Jordan would be named the league MVP for the fifth and final time, and the Bulls went into the playoffs as the number one seed in the Eastern Conference.The first round of the playoffs for the Bulls was against the New Jersey Nets, a team led by Keith Van Horn, Kendall Gill and Sam Cassell. The Bulls swept the Nets three to nothing in a best of five series. The conference semi-finals were more challenging with the Charlotte Hornets stealing game two from the Bulls at the United Center, and tying the series 1\u20131. But the Bulls easily defeated the Hornets in the next three games of the series. The Conference Finals was a challenge for the Bulls as they went up against the Reggie Miller-led Indiana Pacers. Experts were of the opinion that the Pacers had the best chance to defeat the Bulls.[23] The Pacers gave the Bulls no road wins, winning games 3, 4, and 6, sending the series to a deciding game seven at the United Center. The Bulls prevailed and beat the Pacers 88\u201383, winning their sixth Eastern Conference title.In a much-anticipated Finals, The Bulls faced the team they beat the previous year, the Utah Jazz. Led by Karl Malone and John Stockton, the Jazz felt confident that they could defeat the Bulls, winning game one at Utah's Delta Center. Facing a potential two to nothing deficit, the Bulls won Game 2 at the Delta Center and tied the series. The Bulls returned to the United Center and, by winning the next two games, took a 3\u20131 series lead. The Jazz won Game 5 by two points, 83\u201381. Game 6 was a tough battle for both teams. Scottie Pippen left early in the first quarter due to an ongoing back injury. He came back at the start of the second half, and after a trip or two to the locker room to get physical therapy, came back out to finish the game. Late in the game and down by three points to the Jazz, Michael Jordan led the Bulls to one final win. Jordan hit a shot to bring the Bulls within 1, then stole the ball from Karl Malone and hit the game winning shot with 5.2 seconds remaining on the clock. With a score of 87\u201386, John Stockton put up a three-pointer, but missed, giving the Bulls their sixth championship in eight years. Jordan would be named the Finals MVP for the sixth time in his career. He retired for the second time on January 13, 1999.1998\u20132008: Post-Jordan era and a decade of struggle[edit]1998\u20132004: Post-dynasty struggles[edit]This section has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)This section may be too long and excessively detailed. Please consider summarizing the material. (February 2022)This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this message) (Learn how and when to remove this message)The summer of 1998 brought an abrupt end to the championship era.[24] Krause felt that the Bulls were on the verge of being too old and unable to compete. He decided that the team's only choices were to rebuild or endure a slow decline. His plan was to trade away the aging talent and acquire high draft picks while clearing salary cap space to make a run at several promising free agents in two years' time. After having been vetoed in a previous attempt by owner Jerry Reinsdorf, Krause traded Scottie Pippen for Roy Rogers (who was released in February 1999) and a conditional second-round draft pick from the Houston Rockets. He also decided not to re-sign Dennis Rodman, and traded Luc Longley and Steve Kerr for other draft picks. He hired a new coach, Tim Floyd, who had run a successful program at Iowa State University. Upon Phil Jackson's departure, Michael Jordan made his second retirement official. With a new starting lineup of point guard Randy Brown, shooting guard Ron Harper, newcomer Brent Barry at small forward, power forward Toni Kuko\u010d, and center Bill Wennington, the team began the lockout-shortened 1998\u201399 season. Kuko\u010d led the team in scoring, rebounding, and assists, but the team won only 13 of 50 games. The lowest point of the season came on April 10 in a game against the Miami Heat. In that game, the Bulls scored 49 points to set an NBA record for the fewest points in a game in the shot-clock era.The previous year's dismal finish came with one highlight: the team won the draft lottery and the rights to power forward Elton Brand. Since the team lost Harper, Wennington and Barry in the off-season, Brand and fellow rookie Ron Artest led the team throughout the year, especially after Kuko\u010d missed most of the season due to injury and was then dealt for a draft pick at the trading deadline. Brand recorded the first 20\u201310 average for the Bulls since the days of Artis Gilmore. He led all rookies in scoring, rebounds, blocks, field goal percentage and minutes, while Artest led all rookies in steals and finished second on the team in scoring. For his efforts Brand was named 1999\u20132000 co-Rookie of the Year with Houston's Steve Francis, and to the all-rookie first team, while Artest was named to the all-rookie second team. However, the team established a franchise low at 17\u201365, second-worst in the league.After a summer in which the Bulls witnessed most major and minor free agents Tim Duncan, Grant Hill, Tracy McGrady, Eddie Jones and even Tim Thomas choose to stay with their teams (or go elsewhere) rather than sign with them, Krause signed free agent center Brad Miller and shooting guard Ron Mercer, and drafted power forward Marcus Fizer and traded draft pick Chris Mihm to Cleveland for the rights of guard Jamal Crawford. Brand again led the team in scoring and rebounds with another 20\u201310 season, but the new acquisitions failed to make a major impact, and they finished with the worst record in team history and the league's worst for the season at 15\u201367.Krause shocked Bulls fans on draft day in 2001 when he traded franchise player Brand to the Los Angeles Clippers for the second pick in the draft, Tyson Chandler. He also selected Eddy Curry with the fourth pick. Since both Chandler and Curry came straight out of high school, neither was expected to make much of a contribution for several years, but they were seen as potential franchise players. The team floundered without veteran leadership. At mid-season, the Bulls traded their top three scorers\u2014Mercer, Artest, and Miller along with Kevin Ollie\u2014to the Indiana Pacers for veteran guard Jalen Rose, Travis Best and Norman Richardson. There was also a change in coaching, with Floyd being dismissed in favor of assistant coach and former Bulls co-captain Bill Cartwright, following a series of arguments with players and management. The Bulls improved from 15 to 21 wins, although they were still tied for last in the league.For the 2002\u201303 season, the Bulls came to play with much optimism. They picked up college phenom Jay Williams with the second pick in the draft. Williams teamed with Jalen Rose, Crawford, Fizer, newcomer Donyell Marshall, Curry, Chandler, and guard Trenton Hassell to form a young and exciting nucleus which improved to 30\u201352 in Bill Cartwright's first full season as head coach. Curry led the league in field goal percentage, becoming the first Bull since Jordan to lead the league in a major statistical category.During the summer of 2003, long-time general manager Jerry Krause retired, and former player and color commentator John Paxson was tapped as his successor. Jay Williams, coming off a promising rookie campaign, was seriously injured in a motorcycle accident. His contract was bought out by the Bulls in February 2004, and he never returned to the league. Paxson selected point guard Kirk Hinrich with the seventh pick in the draft, and signed veteran free agent and former franchise player Scottie Pippen. With Pippen playing, Cartwright at the sidelines, and Paxson in the front office, the Bulls hoped that some of the championship magic from before would return.However, the 2003\u201304 season was a resounding disappointment. Eddy Curry regressed, leading to questions about his conditioning and commitment. Tyson Chandler was plagued by a chronic back injury, missing more than thirty games. Pippen's ability to influence games was impaired by knee problems, and he openly contemplated retirement. Jamal Crawford remained inconsistent. Bill Cartwright was fired as head coach in December and replaced with former Phoenix coach Scott Skiles. A trade with the Toronto Raptors brought Antonio Davis and Jerome Williams in exchange for Rose and Marshall in what was seen as a major shift in team strategy from winning with athleticism to winning with hard work and defense. After struggling throughout the season, the Bulls finished with 23 wins and 59 losses, the second-worst record in the league. Fizer was not re-signed, and Crawford was re-signed and traded to the Knicks for expiring contracts. Hinrich provided the lone bright spot, becoming a fan favorite for his gritty determination and tenacious defense. He won a place on the All-Rookie first team.2004\u20132007: Resurgence[edit]This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this message)Luol Deng made his first All-Star appearance with the team in 2012 and his second in 2013.During the 2004 off-season, Paxson traded a 2005 draft pick to the Phoenix Suns in return for an additional pick in the 2004 NBA draft. He used the picks to select Connecticut guard Ben Gordon and Duke small forward Luol Deng in the first round, and Duke point guard Chris Duhon in the second. Paxson also signed free agent small forward Andr\u00e9s Nocioni, who had recently won an Olympic gold medal as a member of the Argentina national basketball team. After losing the first nine games of the season, the Bulls began to show signs of improvement behind their improved team defense and clutch fourth-quarter play from Gordon. The Bulls, who were 0\u20139 to start the season, finished the regular season 47\u201335, with the third-best record in the Eastern Conference and advanced to the NBA playoffs for the first time since Jordan's departure. In the first round, the fourth-seeded Bulls played the Washington Wizards. Despite an injury to Deng and a heart issue with Curry, the Bulls opened the series with two wins at home, but lost the next four games and the series. After the season, Ben Gordon became the first rookie to win the NBA Sixth Man Award and the first Bull since Kuko\u010d in 1996 to win the award.During the 2005 off-season, the Bulls re-signed free agent Tyson Chandler. However, Curry showed possible symptoms of a heart disease resulting of a heart murmur during checkups, and Paxson would not clear him to play without extensive DNA testing. Ultimately, Curry refused to participate in the tests, and he was traded along with Antonio Davis to the New York Knicks for Michael Sweetney, Tim Thomas, and what became the second pick of the 2006 NBA draft\u2014as well as the right to swap picks with New York in the 2007 NBA draft.Without a significant post presence, the Bulls struggled for most of the 2005\u201306 season. However, a late season 12\u20132 surge allowed them to finish 41\u201341 and qualify for the 2006 playoffs as the seventh seed. There, the Bulls faced the Miami Heat. After two close losses in Miami, the Bulls broke through with a win in Game 3, and another win in Game 4. However, the Heat took the next two games to win the series and went on to win that year's championship. The Bulls' several young players nevertheless earned additional postseason experience, and Nocioni turned in a remarkable series of performances that far exceeded his season averages.In the 2006 NBA Draft, the Bulls were awarded forward-center LaMarcus Aldridge and immediately traded him to the Portland Trail Blazers for forward Tyrus Thomas and forward Viktor Khryapa. In a second draft-day trade, the Bulls selected Rodney Carney and traded him to the Philadelphia 76ers for guard Thabo Sefolosha. Later that summer, four-time Defensive Player of the Year Ben Wallace signed with the Bulls for a reported four-year, $60\u00a0million contract. Following the signing of Wallace, the Bulls traded Tyson Chandler, the last remaining player of the Krause era, to the (then) New Orleans/Oklahoma City Hornets for veteran power forward P.J. Brown and J. R. Smith and salary cap space that was used to sign former Chicago co-captain Adrian Griffin.In 2006\u201307, the Bulls overcame a 3\u20139 season start to finish 49\u201333, the third-best record in the Eastern Conference. In the first round, the Bulls again faced Miami, the defending NBA champions. The Bulls narrowly won Game 1 at home, then followed it with a victory in Game 2. In Miami, the Bulls rallied from a 12-point second-half deficit to win Game 3 and then posted another comeback win in Game 4. The Bulls' four-game sweep of the defending champions stunned many NBA observers. It was Chicago's first playoff series victory since 1998, Jordan's last season with the team.The Bulls then advanced to face the Detroit Pistons, marking the first time the Central Division rivals had met in the playoffs since 1991. The Pistons won the first three games including a big comeback in Game 3. No NBA team had ever come back from a 0\u20133 deficit to win the series, but the Bulls avoided a sweep by winning Game 4 by 10 points. The Bulls then easily won Game 5 in Detroit, and had a chance to make NBA history. But they lost at home in game 6 by 10, and the Pistons won the series 4\u20132 on May 17.2007\u20132008: Missing the playoffs[edit]This section has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages)This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources:\u00a0\"Chicago Bulls\"\u00a0\u2013\u00a0news\u00a0\u00b7 newspapers\u00a0\u00b7 books\u00a0\u00b7 scholar\u00a0\u00b7 JSTOR (February 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this message)This section may be too long and excessively detailed. Please consider summarizing the material. (February 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this message)Joakim Noah was drafted by the Bulls in 2007. He was named an All Star for the first time in 2013 and for the second time in 2014.During the off season, the Bulls signed forward Joe Smith and guard Adrian Griffin, and drafted center Joakim Noah. However, distractions began when Luol Deng and Ben Gordon turned down contract extensions, never citing reasons. Then rumors surfaced that the Bulls were pursuing stars like Kevin Garnett, Pau Gasol, and most notably, Kobe Bryant. None of these deals happened, and general manager John Paxson denied a deal was ever imminent.The Bulls started the 2007\u201308 season by losing 10 of their first 12 games and on December 24, 2007, after a 9\u201316 start, the Bulls fired head coach Scott Skiles. Jim Boylan was named the interim head coach on December 27, 2007.On February 21, 2008, Ben Wallace, Joe Smith, Adrian Griffin and the Bulls' 2009 second-round draft pick were exchanged for Drew Gooden, Cedric Simmons, Larry Hughes and Shannon Brown in a three-team trade deal involving the Cleveland Cavaliers and the Seattle SuperSonics.[25] Boylan was not retained on April 17 at the conclusion of the 2007\u201308 season after compiling a 24\u201332 record with the Bulls. The Bulls ended the 2007\u201308 campaign with a 33\u201349 record, a complete reversal of last year's record.After Jim Boylan's interim tenure expired, the Bulls began the process of selecting a new head coach. They were in talks with former Phoenix head coach Mike D'Antoni, but on May 10, 2008, he signed with the New York Knicks. Other possible options included former Dallas head coach Avery Johnson and former Bulls head coach Doug Collins. Collins resigned from the coaching list on June 4, 2008, reporting that he did not want to ruin his friendship with Jerry Reinsdorf.On June 10, 2008, the Bulls general manager John Paxson hired Vinny Del Negro, with no coaching experience, to coach the young Bulls. On July 3, 2008, the Chicago Tribune reported that Del Harris agreed to become an assistant coach for the Bulls along with former Charlotte Bobcats head coach Bernie Bickerstaff and longtime NBA assistant coach Bob Ociepka. Along with Bickerstaff and Ociepka, Harris helped establish a veteran presence on the coaching staff and helped rookie head coach Del Negro.2008\u20132016: Derrick Rose era[edit]2008\u20132010: Appearance of Derrick Rose[edit]With a slim 1.7 percent chance of winning the rights to draft first overall, the Bulls won the 2008 NBA draft lottery and selected first overall.[26] With this, the Bulls became the team with the lowest chance of winning to ever win the lottery since it was modified for the 1994 NBA draft, and second-lowest ever. On June 26, 2008, the Bulls drafted Chicago native Derrick Rose from the University of Memphis as the number 1 draft pick. At pick number 39 they selected Sonny Weems. The Bulls later traded Weems to the Denver Nuggets for Denver's 2009 regular second-round draft pick. The Bulls then acquired \u00d6mer A\u015f\u0131k from the Portland Trail Blazers (selected with the 36th pick) for Denver's 2009 second-round draft pick, New York's 2009 second-round draft pick, and the Bulls' 2010 regular second-round draft pick. The Bulls re-signed Luol Deng to a six-year $71\u00a0million contract on July 30, 2008. He was later plagued with an injury keeping him from action for most of the 2008\u201309 season. Ben Gordon signed a one-year contract on October 2, 2008.Derrick Rose was drafted first overall by the Bulls in 2008. He was the 2010\u201311 NBA MVP.On February 18, 2009, the Bulls made their first of several trades, sending Andr\u00e9s Nocioni, Drew Gooden, Cedric Simmons, and Michael Ruffin to the Sacramento Kings for Brad Miller and John Salmons.[27] Then on February 19, 2009, the NBA trade deadline, the Bulls traded Larry Hughes to the New York Knicks for Tim Thomas, Jerome James, and Anthony Roberson.[28] Later that day the Bulls made the third trade in a span of less than 24 hours by sending swingman Thabo Sefolosha to the Oklahoma City Thunder for a 2009 first-round pick.[29] The trades brought a late season push for the Bulls, which finally clinched a playoff berth on April 10, 2009, their fourth in the last five years. They finished the season with a 41\u201341 record. Their record was good enough to secure a No. 7 seed in the 2009 NBA playoffs, playing a tough series against the Boston Celtics. In Game 1, Derrick Rose scored 36 points, along with 11 assists, tying Kareem Abdul-Jabbar's record for most points scored by a rookie in a playoff debut. After breaking the record for most overtimes played in an NBA Playoffs Series, the Boston Celtics managed to overcome the Bulls after 7 games and 7 overtime periods played.[30]The Bulls had two first-round picks in the 2009 NBA draft and decided to take Wake Forest stand out forward James Johnson and athletic USC forward Taj Gibson.[31] In the 2009 NBA off-season the Bulls lost their leading scorer, Ben Gordon, when he signed with their divisional rival, the Detroit Pistons.On February 18, 2010, John Salmons was traded to the Milwaukee Bucks for Joe Alexander and Hakim Warrick. Meanwhile, Tyrus Thomas was traded to the Charlotte Bobcats for Acie Law, Flip Murray and a future protected first-round pick. On April 14, 2010, the Bulls clinched the playoffs with the number 8 seed. Unlike the previous year, however, the Bulls' playoff run was shorter and less dramatic as they were eliminated by the Cleveland Cavaliers in five games. On May 4, 2010, the Bulls officially fired head coach Vinny Del Negro.[32]2010\u20132011: Arrival of Tom Thibodeau[edit]Tom Thibodeau coached the Bulls to 62 wins in his first season.In early June 2010, Boston Celtics assistant Tom Thibodeau accepted a three-year contract to fill the Bulls' head coaching vacancy.[33] He was officially introduced on June 23.[34] On July 7, it was revealed that Carlos Boozer of the Utah Jazz had verbally agreed to an $80\u00a0million, five-year contract. Afterwards, the Bulls traded veteran point guard Kirk Hinrich to the Washington Wizards to create more cap space. The Bulls also signed former 76er and Jazz sharpshooter Kyle Korver to a three-year, $15\u00a0million contract. The same day that the Bulls signed Kyle Korver, they signed Turkish All-Star \u00d6mer A\u015f\u0131k. After being matched by the Orlando Magic for J. J. Redick, they signed their third free agent from the Jazz in the off-season in shooting guard Ronnie Brewer, traded for former Warrior point guard C.J. Watson, and signed former Bucks power forward Kurt Thomas as well as former Spurs player Keith Bogans and former Celtic Brian Scalabrine.Rose earned the 2011 NBA MVP Award, thereby becoming the youngest player in NBA history to win it. He became the first Bulls player since Michael Jordan to win the award. As a team, Chicago finished the regular season with a league-best 62\u201320 record and clinched the first seed in the Eastern Conference for the first time since 1998. The Bulls defeated the Indiana Pacers and the Atlanta Hawks in five and six games, respectively, thereby reaching the Eastern Conference finals for the first time since 1998, and faced the Miami Heat. After winning the first game of the series, they lost the next four games, ending their season.2011\u20132014: Injury-plagued seasons for Derrick Rose[edit]This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this message)During the off-season, the Bulls drafted Jimmy Butler 30th overall in the 2011 NBA draft. After the NBA lockout ended, the Bulls lost Kurt Thomas to free agency, and released Keith Bogans. The Bulls signed veteran shooting guard Richard \"Rip\" Hamilton to a three-year deal, after he was waived by the Detroit Pistons. The Bulls also gave MVP Derrick Rose a 5-year contract extension worth $94.8 million.Derrick Rose was voted as an NBA All-Star starter for the second consecutive year, and was the third leading voted player overall behind Dwight Howard and Kobe Bryant. Luol Deng was also selected as a reserve for the Eastern Conference. This was the first time that the Bulls had two all-stars since 1997, when Michael Jordan and Scottie Pippen were the duo. Derrick Rose was injured for most of the 2011\u201312 season; however, the team was still able to finish with a 50\u201316 record and clinched the first seed in the Eastern Conference for the second straight year and the best overall record in the NBA (tied with the San Antonio Spurs). Rose suffered a new injury when he tore his ACL during the fourth quarter of the first playoff game on April 28, 2012, against the Philadelphia 76ers and missed the rest of the series. Head coach Tom Thibodeau was criticized for keeping Rose in the game even though the Bulls were essentially minutes away from their victory over the 76ers. The Bulls lost the next three games, and also lost Noah to a foot injury after he severely rolled his ankle stepping on Andre Iguodala's foot in Game 3; he briefly returned for part of the fourth quarter of that game, but missed the following games in the series. After winning Game 5 at home, the Bulls were eliminated by the 76ers in Game 6 in Philadelphia, becoming the fifth team in NBA history to be eliminated as a first seed by an eighth seed. In Game 6, Andre Iguodala sank two free throws with 2.2 seconds left to put the 76ers up 79\u201378 after getting fouled by \u00d6mer A\u015f\u0131k, who had missed two free throws five seconds earlier. At the end of the season, Boozer and A\u015f\u0131k were the only members on the Bulls' roster to have played in every game, with Korver and Brewer missing one game apiece. In the off-season, the Bulls gave up Lucas to the Toronto Raptors, Brewer to the New York Knicks, Korver to the Atlanta Hawks, Watson to the Brooklyn Nets and A\u015f\u0131k to the Houston Rockets, but brought back Kirk Hinrich. In addition, they added Marco Belinelli, Vladimir Radmanovic, Nazr Mohammed and Nate Robinson to the roster via free agency.Rose missed the entire 2012\u201313 season, but despite his absence, the Bulls finished 45\u201337, second in the Central Division (behind the Indiana Pacers) and fifth in their conference. They defeated the Brooklyn Nets 4\u20133 (after leading 3\u20131) in the first round of the playoffs and lost to the Miami Heat 4\u20131 in the next round.During the season, the Bulls snapped both Miami's 27-game winning streak and the New York Knicks' 13-game winning streak, becoming the second team in NBA history to snap two winning streaks of 13 games or more in a season.Just 10 games into the 2013\u201314 season, Derrick Rose would tear his medial meniscus on a non-contact play. He declared he would miss the remainder of the season. On January 7, 2014, veteran forward Luol Deng was traded to the Cleveland Cavaliers for center Andrew Bynum and a set of picks. Bynum was immediately waived after the trade went through. The Bulls would finish second in the Central Division with 48 wins, and earned home-court advantage in the first round. Joakim Noah finished the season fourth in MVP voting, made All-NBA first team, and was awarded Defensive Player of the Year award. However, due to lack of a strong offensive weapon,they failed to win a single home game en route to losing to the Washington Wizards in five games.In the 2014 NBA draft, the Bulls traded their 16th and 19th picks for Doug McDermott, the former Creighton star and fifth-leading scorer in NCAA history, who was selected with the 11th pick, and in the second round, took Cameron Bairstow with the 49th pick. That off-season, they signed Pau Gasol, re-signed Kirk Hinrich and brought over Eurostar Nikola Miroti\u0107, who was acquired via a draft-day trade in 2011, but could not come over sooner, due to salary cap constraints.2014\u20132015: Return of Derrick Rose to health and rise of Jimmy Butler[edit]This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (February 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this message)The second return of Derrick Rose gave the Bulls and their fans optimism for the 2014\u201315 season. With two-time NBA champion Pau Gasol and a deep bench consisting of Taj Gibson, Nikola Miroti\u0107, Tony Snell, Aaron Brooks, Doug McDermott, Kirk Hinrich, among others, the Bulls were one of the two favorite teams to come out of the Eastern Conference along with the Cleveland Cavaliers. The Bulls started off the season in style with a win over the New York Knicks, and then winning seven of their first ninie games (losses coming to the Cleveland Cavaliers and Boston Celtics). The emergence of Jimmy Butler as a primary scorer for the Bulls was a major surprise and he surged into the forefront of the \"Most Improved Player of the Year\" award race. Butler's statistical jump was noted by many as one of the greatest in NBA History,[35] going from scoring just 13 points per game in 2013\u201314 to scoring 20 points per game in 2014\u201315. Pau Gasol was considered a huge asset for the Bulls and averaged a double-double throughout the season. Both Butler and Gasol ended up making the Eastern Conference All-Star team. The Bulls' second half of the season was marred by inconsistency and frustration set in with Derrick Rose blasting the team for not being on the same page. Tension between management and Tom Thibodeau continued to be a dark cloud hanging over the organization. The Bulls finished with a 50\u201332 record and the third seed in the Eastern Conference. They faced the Milwaukee Bucks in the first round, and took advantage of the young and inexperienced Bucks by going up a quick 3\u20130 in the series. However, inconsistency and not being on the same page yet again plagued the Bulls as the Bucks won the next two games, sending a scare to Chicago. The Bulls bounced back with fury in Game 6 however, beating the Bucks by a playoff record 54 points winning the series 4\u20132. The next round saw the Bulls facing their arch-rival Cleveland Cavaliers, and their biggest nemesis, LeBron James, who had beaten the Bulls in all three of their previous playoff meetings. The Bulls shocked the Cavs in Game 1 dominating them and never trailing. The Cavs answered back in Game 2 in the same fashion, never trailing the entire game. In a pivotal Game 3 in Chicago, the Bulls and Cavs battled closely all the way through, but the Bulls prevailed on a last-second buzzer-beating 3-pointer by Derrick Rose. In Game 4, the Cavaliers would answer once again, with LeBron James hitting the buzzer-beating shot to win the game. The Bulls lack of consistency and poor offensive showing doomed them once again as the Cavaliers won the next two games handily and closed out the series 4\u20132. After the series, speculation erupted about Tom Thibodeau's job security due to escalating feud between Thibodeau and Bulls front office managers Gar Forman and John Paxson.2015\u20132016: Change in approach[edit]Fred Hoiberg was the 22nd head coach in the franchise's history.On May 28, 2015, the Bulls fired Tom Thibodeau to seek a \"change in approach\".[36] The Bulls named Fred Hoiberg as their head coach on June 2, 2015.[37] The Bulls had only 1 draft pick in the 2015 NBA draft, and selected center Bobby Portis from the University of Arkansas. Bulls forward Mike Dunleavy Jr. was ruled out for at least the first four months of the season after completing back surgery. With Dunleavy out indefinitely, the Bulls promoted Doug McDermott to the starting lineup in his place at small forward. Before the season started, coach Fred Hoiberg made an incredibly controversial move by putting Nikola Miroti\u0107 as his starting power forward to pair with center Pau Gasol, meaning Joakim Noah, a long-time Bulls veteran and a fan-favorite was to come off the bench. Hoiberg told the media that the move was suggested by Noah himself but Noah denied having made any suggestions to Hoiberg, which sparked a distrust between the two before the season even began.The Bulls started the 2015\u201316 season off well with an impressive season-opening 97\u201395 victory against archrivals and defending Eastern Conference Champion Cleveland Cavaliers and jumped to an 8\u20133 record in the first month. The Bulls went 10\u20139 and through late November and December. The Bulls came back and won six straight games. However, soon afterwards, they lost 12 of their next 17 games and Butler missed four weeks after injuring his knee. The Bulls were eliminated from playoff contention after a loss to the Miami Heat on April 7, 2016, although finishing the season with a winning record of 42\u201340. It was the first time in 8 years that the Bulls had missed the playoffs.2016\u20132017: Departure of Derrick Rose[edit]On June 22, 2016, Derrick Rose and Justin Holiday, along with a 2017 second-round draft pick, were traded to the New York Knicks for center Robin Lopez, and point guards Jerian Grant and Jos\u00e9 Calder\u00f3n, who was soon traded to the Los Angeles Lakers.[38] On July 7, the Bulls announced the signing of Rose's replacement, guard Rajon Rondo.[39] On July 15, the Bulls signed Chicago native Dwyane Wade.[40] On October 17, 2016, the Bulls acquired 2014 Rookie of the Year Michael Carter-Williams in exchange for Tony Snell.[41]On February 23, 2017, Taj Gibson and Doug McDermott, along with a 2018 second-round draft pick, were traded to the Oklahoma City Thunder for point guard Cameron Payne, shooting guard Anthony Morrow, and power forward/center Joffrey Lauvergne. Jimmy Butler finished the season with several career highs, was named an All-Star, and made All-NBA third team. The Bulls clinched the eighth seed in 2017 NBA playoffs after winning seven of their final ten games and finishing the season with a 41\u201341 record.[42] The team struck an early 2\u20130 lead against the top-seeded Boston Celtics in the first round of the playoffs, but ultimately lost the series after losing the next four games.[43]2017\u2013present: Post Derrick Rose/Zach LaVine era[edit]2017\u20132020: Final years of GarPax and rebuilding[edit]On June 22, 2017, Jimmy Butler, along with Chicago's 2017 first-round pick, was traded to the Minnesota Timberwolves for Zach LaVine, Kris Dunn, and Minnesota's 2017 first-round pick, which the Bulls used to select Lauri Markkanen. Additionally, on June 27, the Bulls did not give a qualifying offer to Michael Carter-Williams, allowing him to enter unrestricted free agency. On June 30, Rajon Rondo and Isaiah Canaan were waived by the Bulls. On July 10, 2017, Justin Holiday returned to the Bulls signing a 2-year, $9 million contract. On September 24, 2017, Dwyane Wade and the Bulls reportedly agreed to a buyout of the remaining year on his contract. Adrian Wojnarowski reported that Wade gave back $8 million of his $23.2 million contract as part of the agreement.On October 17, 2017, a fight broke out in practice between Bobby Portis and Nikola Miroti\u0107, who suffered a concussion and two broken bones in his face.[44] Portis was suspended eight games for his role in the altercation,[45] and Miroti\u0107 missed 23 games to start the regular season. On February 1, 2018, the Bulls traded Miroti\u0107 and a second-round draft pick to the New Orleans Pelicans for a first-round draft pick and \u00d6mer A\u015f\u0131k, Tony Allen, and Jameer Nelson.[44] Bulls ended up finishing the season with 27\u201355 record.[46]On June 21, 2018, the Bulls selected Wendell Carter Jr. with the seventh overall pick, and with 22nd overall pick via trade with New Orleans Pelicans selected Chandler Hutchison. On July 8, the Bulls matched an offer Zach LaVine received from the Sacramento Kings for a four-year, $78 million deal. On July 14, the team signed Jabari Parker to a two-year, $40 million contract after the Milwaukee Bucks' general manager Jon Horst removed the qualifying offer on the restricted free agent and allowed him to become unrestricted. Part of Parker's agreement gave the Bulls a team option for the second year. On December 3, the Bulls fired head coach Hoiberg after the team started the 2018\u201319 season 5\u201319 and promoted his assistant Jim Boylen as head coach. On January 3, 2019, the Bulls traded Justin Holiday to the Memphis Grizzlies in exchange for MarShon Brooks, Wayne Selden Jr. and 2019 and 2020 second-round draft picks. MarShon Brooks and Cameron Payne were waived.[47] On February 6, the team traded Bobby Portis, Jabari Parker and a 2023 second-round draft pick to the Washington Wizards an exchange for Otto Porter. After a season filled with injuries, coaching change, and trades, the Bulls finished with 22\u201360 record missing the playoffs for the second straight year.On June 20, 2019, the Bulls selected Coby White with the seventh overall pick and Daniel Gafford with 38th pick in the second round. During the off-season, the team signed veterans Tom\u00e1\u0161 Satoransk\u00fd and Thaddeus Young. In March 2020, the league suspended the season after Rudy Gobert tested positive for COVID-19.[48] In April 2020, the Bulls fired longtime general manager Gar Forman, reassigned John Paxson to senior advisor role and hired Art\u016bras Karni\u0161ovas as executive vice president of basketball operations.[49] In May 2020, the Bulls hired Marc Eversley as general manager. On June 4, 2020, the Bulls season officially came to an end when the NBA Board of Governors approved a plan to bring 22 teams back to finish the season in the NBA Bubble. The Bulls finished with a 22\u201343 record. Head coach Jim Boylen was fired on August 14, 2020.[50]On September 22, 2020, the Bulls hired Billy Donovan as head coach. Donovan had previously coached the Oklahoma City Thunder.[51]On November 18, 2020, the Bulls selected Patrick Williams with the fourth overall pick.[52]On March 25, 2021, the Bulls traded Wendell Carter Jr, Otto Porter, along with 2021 and 2023 first-round draft picks to Orlando Magic for Nikola Vu\u010devi\u0107 and Al-Farouq Aminu. The team also traded Chandler Hutchison and Daniel Gafford to the Washington Wizards for Troy Brown Jr. and Moe Wagner.[53] Wagner was later traded along with Luke Kornet to the Boston Celtics for Daniel Theis and Javonte Green.[54] The Bulls finished the abbreviated 72-game season with 31\u201341 record missing the playoffs for the fourth consecutive year.2021\u2013present: Team transformation[edit]On July 29, 2021, the Bulls selected hometown kid Ayo Dosunmu with 38th pick in the second round. On August 2, 2021, the Bulls sent Tomas Satoransky, Garrett Temple, 2024 second-round pick and cash to New Orleans Pelicans for Lonzo Ball.[55] On the same day, the Bulls managed to sign free agent and 2020 NBA Champion Alex Caruso after he and the Los Angeles Lakers failed to reach an agreement.[56] As part of the same preseason rebuild, on August 11, Chicago announced a trade sending Thaddeus Young, Al-Farouq Aminu, a protected first-round pick and second-round pick to the San Antonio Spurs in exchange for four-time All-Star DeMar DeRozan.[57]While playing against the Indiana Pacers on New Year's Eve in the fourth quarter, DeRozan hit a buzzer-beating game-winning shot to sink the Pacers 108-106. The next day on New Year's Day, while the Bulls were down 117-119, DeRozan hit another buzzer-beating shot to defeat the Washington Wizards 120-119, becoming the first player in NBA History to hit back-to-back game-winning buzzer-beater shots in two consecutive days. The Bulls would then go on to win 9 games in a row. On January 22, 2022, it was announced that DeRozan would start in that year's All-Star Game.[58] Eight days later, LaVine was named a reserve in the All-Star Game.[59]The Bulls finished sixth in the Eastern Conference, narrowly evading the play-ins.[60] The Bulls played the defending NBA Champion Milwaukee Bucks in the first round where they would lose in 5 games. [61] The Bulls star trio Lavine-DeRozan-Vucevic all struggled in this series .[62][63] On June 23, 2022, Bulls selected Dalen Terry with the 18 pick. On July 7, the Bulls re-signed Zach Lavine to a five-year $215.2 million dollar contract, making this largest contract signed in Bulls history.On February 21, 2023, the Bulls signed Patrick Beverley for the rest of the season. After the signing, Billy Donovan stated, \"You hope that a guy like him coming in gives a boost to our team. That's what he's always been.\u201d[64] The addition excited the franchise's fans with a new spark of hope for the play-in tournament. His addition aided the Bulls' win against the understaffed Nets, 131\u201387 on February 24.[65] The Bulls finished the 2022\u201323 season with 40\u201342 record, placing them 10th in the Eastern Conference, thus earning a spot in the play-in tournament. They went on to defeat ninth-seeded Toronto Raptors in the first game but lost the second game to the eventual Eastern Conference champions, the Miami Heat, thus missing the playoffs.On June 22, 2023, the Bulls traded couple second-round picks to the Washington Wizards to obtain 35th overall pick in the draft to select Julian Philips.[citation needed] The Bulls re-signed both Vu\u010devi\u0107 and Coby White to three-year contracts while also signing veteran players Jevon Carter and Torrey Craig.[citation needed]Rivalries[edit]Cleveland Cavaliers[edit]Further information: Bulls\u2013Cavaliers rivalryThe Bulls\u2013Cavaliers rivalry[66] is a National Basketball Association (NBA) rivalry between the Cleveland Cavaliers and the Chicago Bulls. The teams have played each other since the Cavaliers joined the NBA as an expansion team in 1970, but the rivalry didn't begin in earnest until the Bulls drafted Michael Jordan with the third overall pick in 1984. After Jordan would go on to the Washington Wizards and eventually retire, the rivalry died down, but when Cleveland picked LeBron James with the first selection in 2003, the rivalry heated up again. However, the Cavaliers had an edge on the Bulls, who would pick Derrick Rose with the first selection in 2008 to turn Chicago from a lottery team, to a future contender.Detroit Pistons[edit]Further information: Bulls\u2013Pistons rivalryThe Bulls' main division rivals have been the Detroit Pistons ever since the Jordan-led Bulls met the \"Bad Boy\" Pistons in the 1988 Eastern Conference semifinals.[67] The two teams met in the playoffs four consecutive years, with the Pistons winning each time until 1991. The Eastern Conference Finals in 1991 ended with a four-game sweep of the Pistons, who walked off the floor with time still on the game clock.[68] The rivalry was renewed in the 2007 Eastern Conference Semifinals, in which former Detroit cornerstone Ben Wallace met his former team (the Pistons won in 6 games). The geographic proximity and membership in the Central Division further intensify the rivalry, which has been characterized by intense, physical play ever since the teams met in the late 1980s. Chicago fans' rivalry with Detroit extends past the NBA, as the two cities shared divisions in all four major North American sports until 2013 when the Detroit Red Wings moved to the Atlantic Division of the Eastern Conference.[69][70]Miami Heat[edit]The Bulls and the Miami Heat rivalry began once the Heat became contenders during the 1990s, a decade dominated by the Bulls. They were eliminated 3 times by Chicago, who went on to win the title each time. The rivalry was revived due to the return of the Bulls to the playoffs after the departure of Jordan from the Bulls and the emergence of Dwyane Wade and Derrick Rose. The revived rivalry was physical, involving rough plays and hard fouls between players, most notably the actions of former Heat player James Posey. The Bulls and Heat met in the 2011 Eastern Conference Finals, with the Heat winning in 5 games. On March 27, 2013, Chicago snapped Miami's 27-game winning streak. The Bulls and Heat met later that year in the 2013 Eastern Conference Semifinals. Miami won the series 4\u20131. In 2023, the two would meet in the Eastern Conference play-in, with the Heat winning to advance to the playoffs. Notably the game featured former Bull, Jimmy Butler on the Heat and former teammates DeMar DeRozan (Chicago) versus Kyle Lowry (Miami).New York Knicks[edit]Further information: Bulls\u2013Knicks rivalryAnother franchise that the Bulls have competed fiercely with is the New York Knicks. The two teams met in the playoffs in four consecutive years (1991\u20131994) and again in 1996, with the teams' series twice (1992 and 1994) going the full seven games. Their first playoff confrontation, however, came in 1989 when both teams were called \"teams on the rise\" under Michael Jordan and Patrick Ewing, respectively (rivalry that started their freshman year in the 1982 NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Championship Game with Jordan hitting the deciding jumper of the final). That first confrontation would belong to Chicago with six games of the Eastern Semifinals. The Bulls won in the first three years (1991\u20131993) before losing in 1994 but got revenge in 1996. As with Detroit, the historic rivalry between the cities has led to animosity between the teams and occasionally their fans.Traditions[edit]Starting lineup introductions[edit]During the Bulls' run of dominance, the player introductions became world-famous. Longtime announcer Tommy Edwards was the first to use \"Sirius\",[71] \"On The Run\" and other songs in game presentation in the NBA. When Edwards moved to Boston for employment with CBS Radio, he was replaced by Ray Clay in 1990, and Clay continued many of the traditional aspects of the Bulls introductions, including the music, The Alan Parsons Project's \"Sirius\", for all six championship runs. The lights are first dimmed during the visiting team introduction, accompanied by \"The Imperial March\" from Star Wars composed by John Williams or \"On the Run\" by Pink Floyd, or \"Tick of the Clock\" by Chromatics. Virtually all lights in the stadium are then shut off for the Bulls introduction, and a spotlight illuminates each player as he is introduced and runs onto the court; the spotlight is also focused on the Bulls logo prior to the introductions. Since the move to the United Center, lasers and fireworks have been added, and with improvements to the arena's White Way video screen, computer graphics on the stadium monitors have been added. These graphics feature the 3D-animated 'Running of the Bulls' en route to the United Center, along the way smashing a bus featuring the opposing team's logo. Coincidentally, Alan Parsons wrote \"Sirius\" for his own band and was the sound engineer for \"On the Run\" from Pink Floyd's album The Dark Side of the Moon.Traditionally, the players have been introduced in the following order: small forward, power forward, center, point guard, shooting guard. During the championship era, Scottie Pippen was usually the first (or second after Horace Grant) Bulls player introduced, and Michael Jordan the last. (Pippen and Jordan are the only players to play on all six Bulls championship teams.) More recently with Derrick Rose's arrival, the guards have been reversed in order, making the Chicago-bred point guard the last player introduced.  Although internal disputes eventually led to the dismissal of Clay, the Bulls in 2006 announced the return of Tommy Edwards as the announcer.[72]As part of Edwards' return, the introductions changed as a new introduction was developed by Lily and Lana Wachowski, Ethan Stoller and Jamie Poindexter, all from Chicago. The introduction also included a newly composed remix of the traditional Sirius theme. Edwards was replaced in 2020 by Tim Sinclair.[73]Black shoes and socks[edit]The Bulls have an unofficial tradition of wearing black shoes (regardless of being home or away) during the playoffs, which dates all the way back to 1989 when they debuted the tradition.[74] Then-Bulls backup center Brad Sellers suggested to wear black shoes as a way to show unity within the team. For the 1996 playoffs, they became the first team to wear black socks with the black shoes, similar to the University of Michigan and the Fab Five which started the trend in college earlier in the decade. Since then, many teams have this look in both the regular season and playoffs. It was noted when the Bulls made their first playoff appearance during the 2004\u201305 season after a six-year hiatus, they continued the tradition and wore black shoes.[75]Even though the Bulls generally wear black footwear in the playoffs since 1989, there have been some notable exceptions. In the 1995 playoffs against the Magic, when Michael Jordan debuted his Air Jordan XI shoe, he wore the white colorway during the Bulls' playoff games in Orlando. He was fined by the Bulls for not complying with their colorway policy. During the 2009 playoffs, the Bulls again broke the tradition when all of their players wore white shoes and socks in Game 3 of the first round against the Boston Celtics.[76] More recently, since the NBA's relaxation of sneaker color rules, some Bulls players wore either red or white sneakers in defiance of the tradition.Circus trip[edit]The Bulls and their arena mates, the Chicago Blackhawks, shared an odd tradition dating to the opening of Chicago Stadium. Every fall, Feld Entertainment's now-defunct Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey Circus came to Chicago on its nationwide tour. Since it used large indoor venues rather than tents, it took over the United Center for its entire run and the Bulls were forced, along with the Blackhawks, to take an extended road trip that lasted about two weeks. Initially local newspapers and television and radio sportscasters, and later national programs like SportsCenter, referred to this fortnight-long local hiatus as \"the circus trip\".[77][78] Blackhawks chairman Rocky Wirtz, who co-owns the United Center with Bulls chairman Jerry Reinsdorf, let the contract lapse after the circus' 2016 run, and condensed the formerly two-week local run of Feld's Disney on Ice to a week-long period effective February 2018.[79][80] The circus itself would be discontinued in 2017.Name, logo, and uniforms[edit]Name[edit]Dick Klein wanted a name that evoked Chicago's traditional meat packing industry (similarly to the forerunner Packers franchise) and the Chicago Stadium's proximity to the Union Stock Yards.[81] Klein considered names like Matadors or Toreadors, but dismissed them, saying, \"If you think about it, no team with as many as three syllables in its nickname has ever had much success except for the Montreal Canadiens.\" After discussing possible names with his family, Klein settled on Bulls when his son Mark said, \"Dad, that's a bunch of bull!\"[82]Chicago Bulls wordmark (1966\u2013present)Logo[edit]The Bulls are unique in the fact they have used the same logo with very little change since the team's inception. The iconic logo is a red, charging bull's face. The logo was designed by noted American graphic designer Dean P. Wessel[83] and was adopted in 1966. At one point, the Bulls also had an alternate logo during the early 1970s, featuring the same Bulls logo, but with a cloud that says \"Windy City\" below the bull's nose.Uniforms[edit]1966\u20131973 uniforms[edit]The Bulls wear three different uniforms: a white uniform, a red uniform, and a black alternate uniform. The original uniforms were esthetically close to the current design, featuring the iconic diamond surrounding the Bulls logo on the shorts and block lettering. What distinguished the original uniforms were the black drop shadows, red or white side stripes with black borders, and white lettering on the red uniforms. For the 1969\u201370 season, the red uniforms were tweaked to include the city name.[84]1973\u20131985 uniforms[edit]For the 1973\u201374 season, the Bulls drastically changed their look, removing the side stripes and drop shadows while moving the front numbers to the left chest. While the white uniforms saw the \"Bulls\" wordmark go from a vertically arched to radially arched arrangement, the red uniforms saw a more significant makeover, featuring black lettering and a script \"Chicago\" wordmark. With a few tweaks in the lettering, these uniforms were used until 1985.[84]This uniform set was later revived as a throwback uniform during the 2003\u201304 and 2015\u201316 seasons.1985\u2013present uniforms[edit]Starting with the 1985\u201386 season, the Bulls updated their uniform. Among the more notable changes in the look were centered uniform numbers and a vertically arched \"Bulls\" wordmark in both the red and white uniforms. Like the previous set, this uniform saw a few tweaks particularly in the treatment of the player's name.[84]When Nike became the NBA's uniform provider in 2017, the Bulls kept much of the same look save for the truncated shoulder striping and the addition of the Chicago four stars on the waistline. With Nike and the NBA eliminating designations on home and away uniforms, the Bulls also announced that their red \"Icon\" uniforms would become their home uniforms, and the white \"Association\" uniforms would become their away uniforms.[85] The Bulls would continue to wear red \"Icon\" uniforms in home games until the 2020\u201321 season, after which they returned to wearing the white \"Association\" uniforms in home games starting in the 2021\u201322 season.[86]Alternate black uniforms[edit]In the 1995\u201396 season, the Bulls added a black uniform to their set. The initial look featured red pinstripes and lacked the classic diamond on the shorts. This set was revived as throwback uniforms in the 2012\u201313 seasons.[84]From the 1997\u201398 to the 2005\u201306 seasons, the Bulls wore slightly modified black uniforms without pinstripes. This set, with a few slight changes in the template, also marked the return of the city name in front of the uniform during the 1999\u20132000 season.The 2006\u201307 season saw another change in the Bulls' black alternate uniform, now resembling the red and white uniform with the addition of a red diamond in the shorts. For the 2014\u201315 season, the uniforms were tweaked a bit to include sleeves and a modernized diamond treatment in black with red and white borders.[84]Since the 2017\u201318 season, the Bulls' black uniforms remained mostly untouched for the aforementioned switch to the new Nike logo that affected the treatment towards the shoulder piping. Nike also dubbed this uniform as the \"Statement\" uniform in reference to its third jerseys. The Bulls began wearing the Statement uniforms after Thanksgiving and they are currently used in away games against teams that wear their white, gray/silver or cream uniforms.The 2019\u201320 season marked the return of pinstripes to the Bulls' \"Statement\" uniform, albeit in dark gray. In addition, the diamond treatment returned to red, piping was tweaked, and four six-point stars were featured on the beltline. The Bulls wore this \"Statement\" uniform in select home games and away games against teams wearing white, cream, yellow, red or silver uniforms.[87][88]Other uniforms[edit]During the 2005\u201306 season, the Bulls honored the defunct Chicago Stags by wearing the team's red and blue throwback uniforms. The set featured red tops and blue shorts.From 2006 to 2017, the Bulls wore a green version of their red uniforms during the week of St. Patrick's Day in March. The only red elements visible were those found on the team logo. For 2015 the Bulls wore sleeved versions of the green uniform that featured white lettering with gold and black trim and the \"Chicago\" wordmark replacing \"Bulls\" in front. In 2016 and 2017, they wore the same uniforms minus the sleeves.Between 2009 and 2017, the Bulls wore a variation of their red uniforms as part of the NBA's \"Noche Latina\" festivities every March. The only notable change in this uniform was the \"Los Bulls\" wordmark in front. For 2014, the Bulls briefly retired the look in favor of a black sleeved uniform featuring \"Los Bulls\" in white with red trim.During the NBA's \"Green Week\" celebrations, the Bulls also wore green uniforms, but with a slightly darker shade from their St. Patrick's Day counterparts. They used their black alternate uniforms as its template. They donned the uniforms in a game against the Philadelphia 76ers on April 9, 2009.The Bulls also wore special edition Christmas uniforms as part of the NBA's Christmas Day games. The one-off Christmas uniforms were as follows:2012: Monochrome red uniforms with lettering in red with black trim.2013: Sleeved red uniforms with Bulls logo rendered in silver.2014: Modified version of red uniform featuring the Bulls logo in front and a contrasting white nameplate of the player's first name.2015: Red uniforms with ornate script letters in cream.2016: Monochrome red uniforms with ornate script letters in black.From 2015 to 2017, the Bulls wore a gray \"Pride\" sleeved uniform, featuring the team name and other lettering in red with white trim. The shorts featured a more modernized version of the diamond, along with four six-pointed stars on either side.In the 2017\u201318 season, the Bulls wore special \"City\" uniforms designed by Nike. The uniforms, designed to pay homage to Chicago's flag, are in white and feature the classic \"Chicago\" script and numbers in red with light blue trim along with four six-pointed stars on each side.The Bulls' 2018\u201319 \"City\" uniform is once again inspired from Chicago's flag, with a black base and a portion of the flag with four red six-point stars and two powder blue stripes in front.The Bulls' \"City\" uniform for 2019\u201320 continued the flag theme, featuring a light blue base and a recolored Bulls logo in front. The predominantly blue uniform was also inspired from the waters of Lake Michigan and the Chicago River.For the 2020\u201321 season, the Bulls' \"City\" uniform featured elements of Chicago's Art Deco architecture and imagery, featuring a dark grey base, gold lettering and red accents.The Bulls' \"City\" uniform for the 2021\u201322 season was a \"mixtape\" of past uniform designs. The predominantly red uniform featured the following design cues:Black and white striping, monochrome Bulls logo and white numbers with black drop shadows (1966\u201373 uniforms)Cursive \"Chicago\" script, recolored to match the numbers (1973\u201385 uniforms)Black diamonds with red pinstripes (1995\u201397 alternate uniforms)The 2022\u201323 \"City\" uniform paid homage to Chicago's municipal device \"Y\" symbol. The predominantly white uniform featured rust red letters and black trim, as well as alternating red and black side stripes.[89]The Chicago Stadium served as the inspiration for the Bulls' 2023\u201324 \"City\" uniform. The black-based design featured the vertical \"Chicago\" wordmark taken from the Stadium marquee, along with red numbers on the chest and the \"Madhouse on Madison\" monicker on the jock tag.Mascots[edit]Benny the Bull in February 2018See also: Benny the BullBenny the Bull is the main mascot of the Chicago Bulls. He was first introduced in 1969. Benny is a red bull who wears number 1. Benny is one of the oldest and best-known mascots in all of professional sports. The Bulls also had another mascot named Da Bull. Introduced in 1995, he was described on the team website as being the high-flying cousin of Benny, known for his dunking skills. The man who portrayed Da Bull was arrested in 2004 for possession and selling marijuana from his car.[90] Da Bull was retired soon after the incident. While Benny has a family-friendly design, Da Bull was designed as a more realistic bull. Unlike Benny, Da Bull was brown. He also had a meaner facial expression and wore number 95.Season-by-season record[edit]List of the last five seasons completed by the Bulls. For the full season-by-season history, see List of Chicago Bulls seasons.Note: GP = Games played, W = Wins, L = Losses, W\u2013L% = Winning percentageSeasonGPWLW\u2013L%FinishPlayoffs2019\u201320652243.3383rd, CentralDid not qualify2020\u201321723141.4313rd, CentralDid not qualify2021\u201322824636.5612nd, CentralLost in First Round, 1\u20134 (Bucks)2022\u201323824042.4883rd, CentralDid not qualify2023\u201324823943.4764th, CentralDid not qualifyFranchise records[edit]Main article: Chicago Bulls accomplishments and recordsTraining facilities[edit]Alumni Hall on DePaul University's Lincoln Park campus was the practice facility for the Bulls in the 1960s and 1970s.[91][92]In 1992, the team began training at the Berto Center, located in Deerfield, Illinois.[93]On June 13, 2012, the team announced that it would move its practice facility to a downtown location closer to the United Center to reduce game day commutes.[94] On September 12, 2014, the Bulls officially opened their new training facility, the Advocate Center (named after the Advocate Medical Group, one of the medicine-practicing firms that serves Chicago), a block east of the United Center.[95]Home arenas[edit]ArenaArenaTenureInternational Amphitheatre1966\u20131967Chicago Stadium1967\u20131994United Center1994\u2013presentPersonnel[edit]Further information: Chicago Bulls all-time roster and Chicago Bulls draft historyCurrent roster[edit]Chicago Bulls rostervtePlayersCoachesPos.No.NameHeightWeightDOBFromG2Ball, Lonzo\u00a06\u00a0ft 6\u00a0in (1.98\u00a0m)190\u00a0lb (86\u00a0kg)1997-10-27UCLAF17Bitim, Onuralp6\u00a0ft 6\u00a0in (1.98\u00a0m)215\u00a0lb (98\u00a0kg)1999-03-31Huntington Prep (WV)G5Carter, Jevon6\u00a0ft 1\u00a0in (1.85\u00a0m)200\u00a0lb (91\u00a0kg)1995-09-14West VirginiaG6Caruso, Alex6\u00a0ft 5\u00a0in (1.96\u00a0m)186\u00a0lb (84\u00a0kg)1994-02-28Texas A&MF13Craig, Torrey6\u00a0ft 5\u00a0in (1.96\u00a0m)221\u00a0lb (100\u00a0kg)1990-12-19USC UpstateG/F11DeRozan, DeMar6\u00a0ft 6\u00a0in (1.98\u00a0m)220\u00a0lb (100\u00a0kg)1989-08-07USCG12Dosunmu, Ayo6\u00a0ft 5\u00a0in (1.96\u00a0m)200\u00a0lb (91\u00a0kg)2000-01-17IllinoisF77Drell, Henri\u00a0(TW)6\u00a0ft 9\u00a0in (2.06\u00a0m)220\u00a0lb (100\u00a0kg)2000-04-25EstoniaC3Drummond, Andre6\u00a0ft 11\u00a0in (2.11\u00a0m)279\u00a0lb (127\u00a0kg)1993-08-10ConnecticutG30Funk, Andrew\u00a0(TW)6\u00a0ft 5\u00a0in (1.96\u00a0m)200\u00a0lb (91\u00a0kg)1999-09-21Penn StateG/F24Green, Javonte6\u00a0ft 5\u00a0in (1.96\u00a0m)205\u00a0lb (93\u00a0kg)1993-07-23RadfordG8LaVine, Zach\u00a06\u00a0ft 5\u00a0in (1.96\u00a0m)200\u00a0lb (91\u00a0kg)1995-03-10UCLAF15Phillips, Julian6\u00a0ft 8\u00a0in (2.03\u00a0m)198\u00a0lb (90\u00a0kg)2003-11-05TennesseeF21Sanogo, Adama\u00a0(TW)6\u00a0ft 9\u00a0in (2.06\u00a0m)245\u00a0lb (111\u00a0kg)2002-02-12ConnecticutF25Terry, Dalen6\u00a0ft 7\u00a0in (2.01\u00a0m)195\u00a0lb (88\u00a0kg)2002-07-12ArizonaC9Vu\u010devi\u0107, Nikola6\u00a0ft 10\u00a0in (2.08\u00a0m)260\u00a0lb (118\u00a0kg)1990-10-24USCG0White, Coby6\u00a0ft 5\u00a0in (1.96\u00a0m)195\u00a0lb (88\u00a0kg)2000-02-16North CarolinaF44Williams, Patrick\u00a06\u00a0ft 7\u00a0in (2.01\u00a0m)215\u00a0lb (98\u00a0kg)2001-08-26Florida StateHead coachBilly DonovanAssistant coach(es)John BryantMaurice CheeksDamian CotterChris FlemingJosh LongstaffBilly SchmidtPeter J. PattonLegend(C) Team captain(DP) Unsigned draft pick(FA) Free agent(S) Suspended(GL) On assignment to G League affiliate(TW) Two-way affiliate player InjuredRoster  Last transaction: April 4, 2024Retained draft rights[edit]The Bulls hold the draft rights to the following unsigned draft picks who have been playing outside the NBA. A drafted player, either an international draftee or a college draftee who is not signed by the team that drafted him, is allowed to sign with any non-NBA teams. In this case, the team retains the player's draft rights in the NBA until one year after the player's contract with the non-NBA team ends.[96] This list includes draft rights that were acquired from trades with other teams.DraftRoundPickPlayerPos.NationalityCurrent teamNote(s)RefFranchise leaders[edit]Bold denotes still active with the team. Italics denotes still active, but not with the team.Points scored (regular season) (as of the end of the 2023\u201324 season)[97]1. Michael Jordan (29,277)2. Scottie Pippen (15,123)3. Bob Love (12,623)4. Luol Deng (10,286)5. Jerry Sloan (10,233)6. Chet Walker (9,788)7. Artis Gilmore (9,288)8. Zach LaVine (9,049)9. Kirk Hinrich (8,536)10. Reggie Theus (8,279)11. Derrick Rose (8,001)12. Ben Gordon (7,372)13. Horace Grant (6,866)14. Norm Van Lier (6,505)15. Jimmy Butler (6,208)16. Toni Kuko\u010d (6,148)17. Orlando Woolridge (6,146)18. DeMar DeRozan (5,831)19. Dave Greenwood (5,824)20. B. J. Armstrong (5,553)21. Mickey Johnson (5,531)22. Dave Corzine (5,457)23. Joakim Noah (5,325)24. Taj Gibson (5,280)25. John Paxson (4,932)26. Coby White (4,896)27. Bob Boozer (4,807)28. Nikola Vu\u010devi\u0107 (4,664)29. Tom Boerwinkle (4,596)30. Quintin Dailey (4,473)31. Bob Weiss (4,445)32. Carlos Boozer (4,347)33. Andres Nocioni (4,120)34. Clem Haskins (3,703)35. Bill Cartwright (3,638)34. Wilbur Holland (3,568)35. Lauri Markkanen (3,439)36. Eddy Curry (3,414)39. Charles Oakley (3,162)40. Elton Brand (3,117)41. Steve Kerr (3,109)42. Ricky Sobers (3,059)43. Scott May (3,048)44. Nikola Mirotic (2,774)45. Ron Harper (2,760)46. Jalen Rose (2,742)47. Jamal Crawford (2,737)48. Jim Washington (2,736)49. Pau Gasol (2,633)50. Marcus Fizer (2,426)Other statistics (regular season) (as of the end of the 2023\u201324 season)[97]Most minutes playedPlayerMinutesMichael Jordan35,887Scottie Pippen30,269Jerry Sloan24,798Kirk Hinrich23,545Luol Deng22,882Bob Love22,073Norm Van Lier19,122Horace Grant18,204Joakim Noah16,848Artis Gilmore16,777Most reboundsPlayerReboundsMichael Jordan5,836Tom Boerwinkle5,745Scottie Pippen5,726Joakim Noah5,387Jerry Sloan5,385Artis Gilmore5,342Horace Grant4,721Dave Greenwood4,222Luol Deng4,078Bob Love3,998Most assistsPlayerAssistsMichael Jordan5,012Scottie Pippen4,494Kirk Hinrich3,811Norm Van Lier3,676Derrick Rose2,516Reggie Theus2,472John Paxson2,394Bob Weiss2,008Tom Boerwinkle2,007Toni Kuko\u010d1,840Most stealsPlayerStealsMichael Jordan2,306Scottie Pippen1,792Kirk Hinrich857Norm Van Lier724Luol Deng639Horace Grant587Jimmy Butler583Reggie Theus580Joakim Noah481Toni Kuko\u010d476Most blocksPlayerBlocksArtis Gilmore1,029Michael Jordan828Joakim Noah803Scottie Pippen774Taj Gibson695Horace Grant579Dave Corzine573Dave Greenwood526Tyson Chandler487Luol Deng360Most three-pointers madePlayer3-pointers madeKirk Hinrich1,049Zach LaVine994Ben Gordon770Coby White769Scottie Pippen664Michael Jordan555Lauri Markkanen493Nikola Miroti\u0107432Steve Kerr430Andr\u00e9s Nocioni403Head coaches[edit]Main article: List of Chicago Bulls head coachesHall of Famers, retired, and honored numbers[edit]Basketball Hall of Famers[edit]Chicago Bulls Hall of FamersPlayersNo.NamePositionTenureInducted42Nate ThurmondC1974\u2013197619858George GervinG/F1985\u20131986199600Robert ParishC1996\u201319972003122345Michael Jordan 1G1984\u201319931995\u20131998200933Scottie Pippen 2F1987\u201319982003\u20132004201053Artis GilmoreC1976\u201319821987201191Dennis RodmanF1995\u20131998201125Chet WalkerF1969\u2013197520125Guy RodgersG1966\u2013196720147Toni Kuko\u010dF1993\u2013200020213Ben WallaceF/C2006\u20132008202116Pau GasolF/C2014\u2013201620233Dwyane WadeG2016\u201320172023CoachesNamePositionTenureInductedPhil JacksonAssistant coachHead coach1987\u201319891989\u2013199820074Jerry Sloan 3Head coach1979\u201319822009Tex WinterAssistant coach1985\u201319992011ContributorsNamePositionTenureInductedJerry Colangelo 4Executive1966\u201319682004Jerry ReinsdorfOwner1985\u2013present2016Jerry KrauseGeneral manager1985\u201320032017Rod Thorn 5General manager1978\u201319852018Larry CostelloHead coach1978\u201319792022Del HarrisAssistant coach2008\u201320092022Doug CollinsHead coach1986\u201319892024Notes:1 In total, Jordan was inducted into the Hall of Fame twice \u2013 as player and as a member of the 1992 Olympic team.2 In total, Pippen was inducted into the Hall of Fame twice \u2013 as player and as a member of the 1992 Olympic team.3 He also played for the team in 1966\u20131976.4 Colangelo worked as a marketing director, scout, and assistant to the president of the team.[98]5 He also coached the team in 1981\u20131982.FIBA Hall of Famers[edit]Chicago Bulls Hall of FamersPlayersNo.NamePositionTenureInducted122345Michael Jordan 1G1984\u201319931995\u20131998201533Scottie PippenF1987\u201319982003\u201320042017 as member of 1992 Dream Team7Toni Kuko\u010dF1993\u201320002017Notes:1 In total, Jordan was inducted into the FIBA Hall of Fame twice \u2013 as player and as a member of the 1992 Olympic team.Chicagoland Sports Hall of Fame[edit]Main article: Chicagoland Sports Hall of FameRetired numbers and honorees[edit]Chicago Bulls retired numbers and honoreesNo.PlayerPosition/chargeTenureDate retired4Jerry SloanG/SF1966\u20131976February 17, 197810Bob LoveF1968\u20131976January 14, 199423Michael JordanSG1984\u201319931995\u20131998November 1, 199433Scottie PippenSF1987\u201319982003\u20132004December 9, 2005\u2014Phil JacksonCoach1987\u20131989 (assistant)1989\u20131998 (head)May 5, 1999\u2014Johnny KerrCoachBusiness managerBroadcaster1966\u20131968 (head coach)1973\u20131975 (business manager)1977\u20132009 (broadcaster)February 10, 2009\u2014Jerry KrauseGeneral managerMarch 26, 1985\u2013April 7, 2003October 31, 2003The NBA retired Bill Russell's No. 6 for all its member teams on August 11, 2022.[99][100]Chicago Bulls Ring of Honor[edit]On January 12, 2024, the Bulls introduced the Ring of Honor, which honors former players and other personnel.[101]The inaugural class of Ring of Honor inductees included all personnel (players, coaches, executives, etc.) who have had their number retired or were honored with similar banners in the rafters, as well as a number of other contributors to the team over the years, such as original owner Dick Klein and assistant coach Tex Winter. Plans were made to induct a class every two years for people with at least three seasons with the Bulls and being retired from basketball for at least three years.[102]Chicago Bulls Ring of HonorPlayersNo.NamePositionTenureInducted53Artis GilmoreC1976\u20131982, 1987202423Michael JordanSG1984\u20131993, 1995\u2013199820247Toni Kuko\u010dSF1993\u20132000202410Bob LoveSF1968\u20131976202433Scottie PippenSF1987\u20131998, 2003\u20132004202491Dennis RodmanPF1995\u2013199820244Jerry SloanSG1966\u20131976202425Chet WalkerSF1969\u201319752024StaffNamePositionTenureInductedPhil JacksonCoach1989\u201319982024Johnny KerrCoachBroadcaster1966\u201319681975\u201320082024Dick KleinOwner1967\u201319722024Jerry KrauseGeneral manager1985\u201320032024Tex WinterAssistant coach1985\u201319992024TeamsTeamInductedMembers of the 1995\u201396 Chicago Bulls team2024Media[edit]Main article: List of Chicago Bulls broadcastersRadio[edit]The team's games are broadcast on Entercom's WSCR (670) as of February 3, 2018. From October 2015-January 2018, games were carried on Cumulus Media's WLS (890) in a deal that was expected to last until the 2020\u201321 season, but was nullified in the middle of the 2017\u201318 season after Cumulus filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy and nullified several large play-by-play and talent contracts.[103][104]Chuck Swirsky does play-by-play, with Bill Wennington providing color commentary. Univision Radio's WRTO (1200) has carried Spanish language game coverage since 2009\u201310, with Omar Ramos as play-by-play announcer and Matt Moreno as color analyst.Television[edit]The Bulls' television broadcasts are televised by NBC Sports Chicago, which broadcasts all of the games that are not televised nationally as of the 2019\u201320 season. For many years, broadcasts were split between NBC Sports Chicago (and prior to that, FSN Chicago), WGN-TV, and WCIU-TV.[105] The announcers are Adam Amin and Stacey King. Jason Benetti fills in for Amin whenever the latter is assigned to work for Fox Sports.On January 2, 2019, the Bulls (along with the Chicago White Sox and Chicago Blackhawks) agreed to an exclusive multi-year deal with NBC Sports Chicago, ending the team's broadcasts on WGN-TV following the 2018\u201319 season.[106]References[edit]^ \"Chicago Bulls History\". Bulls.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. October 28, 2000. Archived from the original on December 11, 2023. Retrieved December 10, 2023.^ \"NBA.com/Stats\u2013Chicago Bulls seasons\". Stats.NBA.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on December 2, 2022. Retrieved December 2, 2022.^ \"History: Team by Team\" (PDF). 2018-19 Official NBA Guide (PDF). NBA Properties, Inc. October 8, 2018. Archived (PDF) from the original on April 11, 2019. Retrieved June 1, 2019.^ \"Chicago Bulls unveil new court design\". Bulls.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. September 23, 2015. Archived from the original on May 30, 2023. Retrieved May 30, 2023. The lines on the court have been changed from red and white to all black to emphasize the bold colors of the Bulls brand.^ \"NBA Unveils Logo for NBA All-Star 2020 in Chicago\". Bulls.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. February 17, 2019. Archived from the original on February 19, 2019. Retrieved February 18, 2019. The Chicago Bulls' signature font and team colors \u2013 red and black \u2013 are also incorporated into the logo scheme.^ \"Chicago Bulls Reproduction and Usage Guideline Sheet\". NBA Properties, Inc. Archived from the original on December 22, 2017. Retrieved December 22, 2017.^ \"Chicago Bulls Name Motorola Mobility as Official Jersey Patch Partner\". Bulls.com (Press release). NBA Media Ventures, LLC. September 20, 2022. Archived from the original on December 2, 2022. Retrieved December 2, 2022.^ \"Bulls name Marc Eversley General Manager\". Bulls.com. NBA Media Ventures. May 1, 2020. Archived from the original on May 5, 2020. Retrieved May 1, 2020.^ \"This Date in the NBA\u2013January\". NBA.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on December 19, 2017. Retrieved December 22, 2017.^ Jozsa, J. P. Jr., National Basketball Association Strategies: Business Expansions, Relocations, and Mergers (Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer, 2015), p.\u00a011.^ \"Warriors Become Second Team in NBA History to Win 70 Games in a Single Season\". Warriors.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. April 7, 2016. Archived from the original on December 23, 2016. Retrieved December 16, 2016.^ a b c d e Smith, Sam (October 15, 2015). \"The one that started it all\". NBA.com. Retrieved April 15, 2024.^ a b Smith, Sam (September 1, 2012). \"Pat Williams Helped Save Pro Basketball in Chicago\". Bulls.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on June 29, 2018. Retrieved December 16, 2016.^ \"Worst Records of Playoff Teams\". The Sporting News. April 28, 1986. p.\u00a046.^ \"Charlotte Hornets 91 Chicago Bulls 105\". ESPN.com. November 3, 1995. Archived from the original on June 30, 2020. Retrieved July 21, 2019.^ \"Boston Celtics 85 Chicago Bulls 107\". ESPN.com. November 4, 1995. Archived from the original on June 29, 2020. Retrieved July 21, 2019.^ databasebasketball.com, Chicago Bulls 1995\u201396 Game Log and Scores Archived January 25, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved January 20, 2007.^ \"All-Defensive Teams\". NBA.com. Archived from the original on July 17, 2008. Retrieved May 10, 2008.^ \"Top 10 Teams in NBA History\". National Basketball Association. Archived from the original on May 2, 2013. Retrieved December 16, 2016.^ databasebasketball.com, Chicago Bulls 1996\u201397 Game Log and Scores Archived January 25, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved January 16, 2007.^ \"The NBA at 50\". National Basketball Association. Archived from the original on May 12, 2013. Retrieved December 16, 2016.^ \"Robert Parish Bio\". National Basketball Association. Archived from the original on February 7, 2017. Retrieved December 16, 2016.^ a b c Wise, Mike (October 29, 1997). \"N.B.A. Preview '97\u2013'98: End of Line for Dynasty? Aging Bulls to Face Challenge From Several Teams\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 7, 2016. Retrieved December 16, 2016.^ \"Bulls Schedule 1998\u201399\". Bulls.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on September 12, 2009. Retrieved August 1, 2009.^ \"NBA.com: February 2008 Transactions\". NBA.com. Archived from the original on October 18, 2012. Retrieved February 21, 2008.^ Johnson, K. C. (May 16, 2017). \"May 20, 2008: With a 1.7% chance, Bulls win the NBA draft lottery\". chicagotribune.com. Archived from the original on June 7, 2020. Retrieved June 8, 2020.^ \"Kings Acquire Four Players in Three-Team Trade\". NBA.com. February 18, 2009. Archived from the original on February 22, 2009. Retrieved February 19, 2009.^ \"Sources: Knicks trade for Bulls' Hughes\". February 19, 2009. Archived from the original on June 29, 2011. Retrieved February 19, 2009.^ \"Report: Bulls trade Sefolosha for draft pick\". Archived from the original on February 22, 2009. Retrieved February 20, 2009.^ Golen, Jimmy (May 3, 2009). \"OT hold-down: Celtics top Bulls in regulation\u00a0\u2013 NBA\u00a0\u2013 Yahoo! Sports\". Sports.yahoo.com. Archived from the original on May 6, 2009. Retrieved August 1, 2009.^ \"2009 NBA Draft\u00a0\u2013 Yahoo! Sports\". Sports.yahoo.com. June 21, 2009. Archived from the original on August 4, 2009. Retrieved August 1, 2009.^ Johnson, K.C. (May 4, 2010). \"No timetable for new Bulls coach; Pax apologizes\". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on May 7, 2010. Retrieved May 4, 2009.^ K.C. Johnson, Thibodeau accepts Bulls' 3-year offer to be their 18th head coach Archived July 12, 2010, at the Wayback Machine, Chicago Tribune, June 5, 2010.^ \"Thibodeau named 18th head coach in franchise history\". Bulls.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. June 23, 2010. Archived from the original on June 26, 2010. Retrieved June 23, 2010.^ \"Chicago Bulls' Jimmy Butler Most Improved Players\". ESPN. May 7, 2015. Archived from the original on May 10, 2015. Retrieved May 28, 2015.^ Friedell, Nick (May 28, 2015). \"Tom Thibodeau out in Chicago as Bulls seek 'change in approach'\". ESPN. Archived from the original on May 28, 2015. Retrieved May 28, 2015.^ \"Bulls Name Fred Hoiberg Head Coach\". Bulls.com (Press release). NBA Media Ventures, LLC. June 2, 2015. Archived from the original on September 25, 2015. Retrieved September 25, 2015.^ \"Knicks Acquire Derrick Rose\". NBA.com. June 22, 2016. Archived from the original on December 22, 2016. Retrieved June 24, 2016.^ \"Bulls Sign Rajon Rondo\". Bulls.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. July 7, 2016. Archived from the original on October 30, 2016. Retrieved December 16, 2016.^ \"Bulls Sign Dwyane Wade\". Bulls.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. July 15, 2016. Archived from the original on October 25, 2016. Retrieved December 16, 2016.^ \"Bucks Acquire Tony Snell from the Bulls\". NBA.com. October 17, 2016. Archived from the original on October 20, 2016. Retrieved October 17, 2016.^ \"Bulls Clinch Playoff Berth, Will Face Celtics In 1st Round\". CBS Chicago. April 12, 2017. Archived from the original on April 29, 2017. Retrieved April 29, 2017.^ Aschburner, Steve (April 29, 2017). \"Isaiah Thomas, Boston Celtics complete emotional comeback over Chicago Bulls\". NBA.com. Archived from the original on April 29, 2017. Retrieved April 29, 2017.^ a b Johnson, K.C. (February 1, 2018). \"Bulls trade Nikola Mirotic to Pelicans for 1st round pick and 3 players\". chicagotribune.com. Archived from the original on February 23, 2018. Retrieved February 23, 2018.^ Sykes II, Michael D. (October 21, 2017). \"Bobby Portis suspended 8 games for punching teammate Nikola Mirotic in face\". SBNation.com. Archived from the original on February 23, 2018. Retrieved February 23, 2018.^ Anon, \"2018 NBA Draft Lottery results: Chicago Bulls to pick 7th in NBA Draft, Suns get top pick\" Archived July 4, 2020, at the Wayback Machine, ABC News, May 16, 2018.^ \"Bulls Official: Fred Hoiberg Relieved as Bulls Head Coach\". NBA.com. December 3, 2018. Archived from the original on December 4, 2018. Retrieved December 3, 2018.^ \"NBA says virus hiatus will likely last 'at least' a month\". Fox News. Associated Press. March 13, 2020. Archived from the original on January 26, 2021. Retrieved March 1, 2021.^ Seligman, Andrew (April 13, 2020). \"Karnisovas sets course to boost Bulls toward ultimate prize\". ABC News. Archived from the original on June 30, 2020. Retrieved April 14, 2020.^ \"Bulls fire head coach Jim Boylen after 2 seasons\". ESPN.com. August 14, 2020. Archived from the original on August 14, 2020. Retrieved August 14, 2020.^ Wojnarowski, Adrian (September 23, 2020). \"Chicago Bulls hire Billy Donovan as coach to replace Jim Boylen\". ESPN. Archived from the original on May 22, 2023. Retrieved November 29, 2022.^ Smith, Sam (November 18, 2020). \"The Bulls select Patrick Williams from Florida State at No. 4\". NBA.com. NBA. Archived from the original on November 8, 2022. Retrieved November 29, 2022.^ Wimbish, Jasmyn (March 25, 2021). \"Trade grades: Magic deal Nikola Vucevic to Bulls for Wendell Carter Jr., Otto Porter Jr. and picks, per report\". CBS Sports. Archived from the original on November 29, 2022. Retrieved November 29, 2022.^ \"Celtics Acquire Moe Wagner, Luke Kornet in 3-Team Trade\". Nba.com. NBA. March 26, 2021. Archived from the original on March 26, 2021. Retrieved November 29, 2022.^ \"Bulls officially acquire Lonzo Ball in sign-and-trade with Pelicans\". Sportsnet.ca. Archived from the original on November 24, 2021. Retrieved November 24, 2021.^ \"Bulls Sign Alex Caruso\". Chicago Bulls. Archived from the original on November 21, 2021. Retrieved November 24, 2021.^ \"Bulls Acquire DeMar DeRozan\". Chicago Bulls. Archived from the original on March 7, 2022. Retrieved November 24, 2021.^ \"2022 NBA All-Stars starters revealed\". NBA.com. Archived from the original on January 28, 2022. Retrieved February 4, 2022.^ \"2022 NBA All-Stars reserves revealed\". NBA.com. Archived from the original on February 4, 2022. Retrieved February 4, 2022.^ \"Bulls clinch playoff berth for first time in five years despite loss to Bucks\". Chicago Bulls. Archived from the original on May 5, 2022. Retrieved May 5, 2022.^ \"Chicago Bulls Eliminated From Playoffs as Milwaukee Bucks Coast to Victory\". NBC Chicago. April 28, 2022. Archived from the original on May 5, 2022. Retrieved May 5, 2022.^ \"Chicago Bulls eliminated from the playoffs after DeMar DeRozan is held to 11 points in the Game 5 loss\". Chicago Tribune. April 27, 2022. Archived from the original on May 5, 2022. Retrieved May 5, 2022.^ \"2022 NBA Eastern Conference First Round - Bulls vs. Bucks\". Basketball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on May 5, 2022. Retrieved May 5, 2022.^ \"Donovan praises Beverley's competitive spirit\". RSN. February 23, 2023. Archived from the original on March 9, 2023. Retrieved March 9, 2023.^ \"Bulls blow out Nets 131-87 in Patrick Beverley's hometown debut\". NBA.com. Archived from the original on March 22, 2023. Retrieved March 22, 2023.^ \"Chicago Bulls - Cleveland Cavaliers rivalry\". www.rivalrywatch.com. Archived from the original on February 17, 2020. Retrieved June 3, 2017.^ Nelson, Murry R. (2013). American Sports: A History of Icons, Idols, and Ideas [4 volumes]: A History of Icons, Idols, and Ideas. ABC-CLIO. p.\u00a0647. ISBN\u00a0978-0-313-39753-0.^ \"Michael Jordan\". Classicsportsgamesondvd.com. Archived from the original on February 8, 2013. Retrieved December 7, 2012.^ \"Jimmy Butler, Dwyane Wade call out teammates after tough loss\". NBA.com. Archived from the original on March 31, 2017. Retrieved March 30, 2017.^ \"Realignment plan approved by Board of Governors\". NHL.com. Archived from the original on October 21, 2021. Retrieved October 21, 2021.^ Cohen, Ben (April 12, 2016). \"The One Record the Warriors Can't Take From the Bulls: Even as Golden State closes on a historic 73rd win, Chicago's pre-game music still sets the standard\". Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on October 8, 2018. Retrieved October 8, 2018.^ \"BULLS: Tommy Edwards\". Bulls.com. NBA Media Ventures. September 12, 2006. Archived from the original on December 1, 2010. Retrieved August 1, 2009.^ Schaefer, Rob (December 9, 2020). \"Q&A with Tim Sinclair, new PA voice of the Bulls\". NBC Sports. Retrieved May 4, 2022.^ \"Ask Sam Smith: The Tribune's pro basketball reporter answers reader questions\". ChicagoSports.com. April 26, 2007. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved September 9, 2007.^ \"Bulls Take Game 1\". ComcastSportsNet.com. April 24, 2005. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007. Retrieved September 9, 2007.^ \"Tradition broken\". ESPN. April 24, 2009. Archived from the original on July 8, 2011. Retrieved April 24, 2009.^ K.C. Johnson. \"No clowning around: A win\". Chicago Tribune. November 25, 2004. 1.^ Kuc, Chris (November 14, 2007). \"Blackhawks' circus trip starts with thud\". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on January 12, 2012. Retrieved November 4, 2011.^ Chris Kuc. \"Say goodbye to the circus trip: Scheduling quirk to end for Blackhawks, Bulls\". Chicago Tribune. November 14, 2016. 1.^ Kuc, Chris (November 14, 2016). \"Say goodbye to the circus trip: Scheduling quirk to end for Blackhawks, Bulls\". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on January 26, 2017. Retrieved March 19, 2017.^ Samuelson, Heidi (January 10, 2024). \"From the Archives: The Chicago Bulls' First Ring of Honor Class\". Chicago History Museum. Retrieved April 15, 2024.^ \"Behind The Name\u2013Chicago Bulls\". Bulls.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. September 25, 2015. Archived from the original on October 15, 2015. Retrieved September 25, 2015.^ Hilkevitch, Jon (June 23, 1993). \"Logo Designer Has Reason To Horn In On Bulls' Glory\". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on December 3, 2013. Retrieved October 8, 2018.^ a b c d e \"9 eye-catching Bulls jerseys over the years\". History.Bulls.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. December 16, 2015. Archived from the original on April 4, 2017. Retrieved April 3, 2017.^ \"LOOK: Chicago Bulls unveil revamped Nike jerseys, opt to wear red for home games\". CBSSports.com. August 2, 2017. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 28, 2017.^ \"It's official, Bulls will wear white jerseys at home\". NBCSports.com. October 7, 2021. Archived from the original on October 8, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2021.^ \"Chicago Bulls Introduce New Statement Edition Uniforms for 2019-20 Season\". Bulls.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. October 5, 2019. Archived from the original on October 5, 2019. Retrieved October 5, 2019.^ \"NBA Lockervision\". NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on December 12, 2019. Retrieved October 5, 2019.^ \"Chicago Bulls 22/23 City Edition Uniform: Ode to Architecture\". NBA.com. November 10, 2022. Archived from the original on November 10, 2022. Retrieved November 11, 2022.^ \"The Mascots' stigmata\". ESPN. Archived from the original on December 27, 2013. Retrieved January 29, 2012.^ \"Then and now: Chicago's lost sports venues\". chicagotribune.com. August 17, 2017. Archived from the original on April 28, 2019. Retrieved April 27, 2019.^ \"Adios, Alumni Hall\". chicagotribune.com. November 19, 1999. Archived from the original on September 23, 2019. Retrieved April 28, 2019.^ Meadows, Jonah (April 9, 2019). \"Village Board Approves Deerbrook Redevelopment Proposals\". patch.com. Archived from the original on December 14, 2019. Retrieved April 14, 2020.^ Channick, Robert (June 14, 2012). \"Bulls coming home to Chicago\". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on June 15, 2012. Retrieved June 15, 2012.^ Byrne, John (September 12, 2014). \"Bulls open West Side practice facility\". chicagotribune.com. Archived from the original on July 28, 2020. Retrieved September 12, 2014.^ Coon, Larry. \"NBA Salary Cap FAQ \u2013 2011 Collective Bargaining Agreement\". Archived from the original on June 30, 2012. Retrieved April 13, 2014. If the player is already under contract to, or signs a contract with a non-NBA team, the team retains the player's draft rights for one year after the player's obligation to the non-NBA team ends. Essentially, the clock stops as long as the player plays pro ball outside the NBA.^ a b \"Chicago Bulls: Players\". Basketball Reference. April 18, 2017. Archived from the original on April 9, 2017. Retrieved April 18, 2017.^ Charles, Mike. \"Jerry's story\". Archived from the original on March 14, 2012. Retrieved August 16, 2015.^ \"Bill Russell's No. 6 jersey to be retired throughout NBA\". NBA.com. August 11, 2022. Archived from the original on August 17, 2022. Retrieved August 24, 2022.^ Golliver, Ben (August 11, 2022). \"NBA permanently retires Bill Russell's No. 6\". Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 7, 2022. Retrieved August 24, 2022.^ \"Michael Jordan, Scottie Pippen headline inaugural class for Bulls' Ring of Honor\". NBA.com. December 13, 2023. Archived from the original on January 13, 2024. Retrieved January 12, 2024.^ \"Michael Jordan, Scottie Pippen headline inaugural class for Bulls' Ring of Honor\". NBA.com. Archived from the original on January 13, 2024. Retrieved January 13, 2024.^ \"White Sox, Bulls Announce Long-Term Deals with WLS AM 890\". CSNChicago.com. July 16, 2015. Archived from the original on October 26, 2016. Retrieved October 26, 2016.^ Feder, Robert (January 31, 2018). \"Done deal: Bulls pivot to The Score\". Robert Feder. Archived from the original on January 31, 2018. Retrieved February 1, 2018.^ \"Chicago Bulls Schedule\". Bulls.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on June 29, 2018. Retrieved June 29, 2018.^ \"NBC Sports Chicago Announces New Pact With White Sox, Bulls, and Blackhawks\". WMAQ-TV. January 2, 2019. Archived from the original on January 3, 2019. Retrieved January 4, 2019.External links[edit]Wikimedia Commons has media related to Chicago Bulls.Official website vteChicago BullsFounded in 1966Based in Chicago, IllinoisFranchiseAll-time rosterDraft history1966RecordsHead coachesSeasonsCurrent seasonArenasInternational AmphitheatreChicago StadiumUnited CenterPersonnelOwner(s)Jerry ReinsdorfPresidentMichael ReinsdorfGeneral managerMarc EversleyHead coachBilly DonovanG League affiliateWindy City BullsRetired numbers4102333NBA championships199119921993199619971998RivalriesCleveland CavaliersDetroit PistonsNew York KnicksCulture and loreBroadcastersAir JordanJumpmanTommy EdwardsRay ClayBenny the BullDisputed Foul Against Scottie Pippen\"Sirius\"\"I Believe I Can Fly\"\"Sweet Home Chicago\"Bill Swerski's SuperfansJordan RulesTriangle offenseAshland Green/Pink Line StationTex WinterThe Spirit (Michael Jordan statue)Phantom Buzzer GameThe ShotNBA championship riotsBulls vs Lakers and the NBA PlayoffsBulls vs. Blazers and the NBA PlayoffsTrent Tucker RuleThe Calhoun Shot72\u201310Michael Jordan's last shotSpace JamThe Last DanceLinks to related articlesvteChicago Bulls seasonsFranchiseHistorySeasons1960s        1966\u201367 1967\u201368 1968\u2013691970s 1969\u201370 1970\u201371 1971\u201372 1972\u201373 1973\u201374 1974\u201375 1975\u201376 1976\u201377 1977\u201378 1978\u2013791980s 1979\u201380 1980\u201381 1981\u201382 1982\u201383 1983\u201384 1984\u201385 1985\u201386 1986\u2013871987\u201388 1988\u2013891990s 1989\u201390 1990\u201391 1991\u201392 1992\u201393 1993\u201394 1994\u201395 1995\u201396 1996\u201397 1997\u201398 1998\u2013992000s 1999\u201300 2000\u201301 2001\u201302 2002\u201303 2003\u201304 2004\u201305 2005\u201306 2006\u201307 2007\u201308 2008\u2013092010s 2009\u201310 2010\u201311 2011\u201312 2012\u201313 2013\u201314 2014\u201315 2015\u201316 2016\u201317 2017\u201318 2018\u2013192020s 2019\u201320 2020\u201321  2021\u201322  2022\u201323  2023\u201324Bold indicates NBA Finals victoryvteNational Basketball AssociationEasternConferenceAtlanticBoston CelticsBrooklyn NetsNew York KnicksPhiladelphia 76ersToronto RaptorsCentralChicago BullsCleveland CavaliersDetroit PistonsIndiana PacersMilwaukee BucksSoutheastAtlanta HawksCharlotte HornetsMiami HeatOrlando MagicWashington WizardsWesternConferenceNorthwestDenver NuggetsMinnesota TimberwolvesOklahoma City ThunderPortland Trail BlazersUtah JazzPacificGolden State WarriorsLos Angeles ClippersLos Angeles LakersPhoenix SunsSacramento KingsSouthwestDallas MavericksHouston RocketsMemphis GrizzliesNew Orleans PelicansSan Antonio SpursAnnual eventsDrafteligibilitySummer LeagueChristmasMartin Luther King Jr. DayAll-Star weekendgameGlobal GamesCup tournamentPlay-inPlayoffslistfinalschampionsHistoryPredecessorsBAANBLABAmergerWalter A. Brown TrophyCriticisms and controversies2007 Tim Donaghy betting scandalLockoutsFormer divisionsEasternMidwestWesternTeamsdefunctexpansionrelocatedtimelineSeasons2019\u201320 suspension and bubbleRecordsregular seasonpost-seasonAll-Starwin\u2013loss recordsPeoplePlayerscurrent rostersEasternWesternforeign playersrace and ethnicityfirst overall draft pickshighest paidbanned or suspendedNBPAHead coachescurrentplayer-coacheschampionsforeignfemaleNBCAOwnersReferees (NBRA)Awardsand honorsLarry O'Brien TrophyMaurice Podoloff TrophyNBA awardsMVPFinals MVPConference Finals MVPAll-Star MVPHall of FameMembersAnniversary teamsRetired numbersOthersArenasBusinesscollective bargaining agreementjersey sponsorssalary capNBA Storeteam valuationsCulturecheerleadingmascotsdress codesuperteamssleepG LeagueMediaTVNBA TVNBA AcademyRivalriesWNBA\u00a0Basketball portal Category2023\u201324\u00a0seasonvteSports teams based in the Chicago metropolitan areaBaseballMLBChicago CubsChicago White SoxAAChicago DogsGary SouthShore RailCatsKane County CougarsFLJoliet SlammersSchaumburg BoomersWindy City ThunderBoltsNorLCrestwood PanthersDuPage County HoundsJoliet GeneralsNorthwest Indiana OilmenSouthland VikingsBasketballNBAChicago BullsWNBAChicago SkyG LeagueWindy City BullsABAChicago FuryChicago SteamLibertyville VipersEsportsCDLOpTic ChicagoFootballNFLChicago BearsHockeyNHLChicago BlackhawksAHLChicago WolvesUSHLChicago SteelLacrosseCILLChicago OutlawsMCLCChicago Lacrosse ClubChitown Lacrosse ClubLincoln Park Lacrosse ClubWindy City Lacrosse ClubRoller derbyUSARSChicago Red HotsWFTDAChicago Outfit Roller DerbyWindy City RollersRugbyMLRChicago HoundsUSARChicago Griffins RFCChicago Lions RFCSoccerMLSChicago Fire FCMLSNPChicago Fire FC IIUSL2Chicago City SCUSLWChicago City SCNWSLChicago Red StarsIndoor soccerM2Chicago MustangsAustralian rules footballUSAFL Chicago SwansUltimateUFAChicago UnionTeam tennisWTTChicago SmashCollege athletics(NCAA Division I)Chicago State CougarsDePaul Blue DemonsLoyola RamblersNorthern Illinois HuskiesNorthwestern WildcatsUIC FlamesValparaiso BeaconsCollege athletics(NCAA Division II)Lewis FlyersParkside RangersPurdue-Northwest PrideCollege athletics(NCAA Division III)Aurora SpartansBenedictine EaglesCarthage FirebirdsChicago MaroonsConcordia CougarsDominican StarsElmhurst BluejaysIllinois Tech Scarlet HawksLake Forest ForestersNorth Central CardinalsNorth Park VikingsWheaton ThunderCollege athletics(NAIA)CCSJ Crimson WaveGovernors State JaguarsIU Northwest RedhawksJudson EaglesOlivet Nazarene TigersRoosevelt Lakers (NCAA Division II in 2024)St. Francis Fighting SaintsSaint Xavier CougarsTrinity Christian TrollsTrinity International TrojansvteSports teams based in IllinoisBaseballMLBChicago CubsChicago White SoxMLPeoria ChiefsAAChicago DogsKane County CougarsFLGateway GrizzliesJoliet SlammersSchaumburg BoomersWindy City ThunderBoltsNWLRockford RivetsPLAlton River DragonsDanville DansIllinois Valley Pistol ShrimpNormal CornBeltersSpringfield Lucky HorseshoesThrillville ThrillbilliesBasketballNBAChicago BullsWNBAChicago SkyG LeagueWindy City BullsABAChicago FuryChicago SteamLibertyville VipersWindy City GrooveIBAKankakee County SoldiersRockford RiverdawgsWindy City BlazersMPBAChampaign SwarmChicago ForcePontiac 66ersWindy City GrooveFootballNFLChicago BearsIFLQuad City SteamwheelersHockeyNHLChicago BlackhawksAHLChicago WolvesRockford IceHogsECHLBloomington Bison (2024)SPHLPeoria RivermenQuad City StormUSHLChicago SteelNAHLSpringfield Jr. BluesInline hockeyMLRHChicago CarnageRoller derbyUSARSChicago Red HotsWFTDAChicago Outfit Roller DerbyRockford RageSouthern Illinois Roller GirlsTwin City Derby GirlsWindy City RollersRugby leagueMWRLChicago StockyardersRugby unionMLRChicago HoundsRSLChicago Griffins RFCChicago Lions RFCMRFURowdies Rugby Football ClubSpringfield Celts Rugby ClubSoccerMLSChicago Fire FCMLS Next ProChicago Fire FC IIUSL2Chicago City SCNPSLQuad City EaglesPLAAurora Borealis SCRWB AdriaNWSLChicago Red StarsWPSLChicago Red Stars ReservesIndoor soccerM2Chicago MustangsUltimateUFAChicago UnionCollegeathleticsNCAADivision IBradley BravesChicago State CougarsDePaul Blue DemonsEastern Illinois PanthersIllinois Fighting IlliniIllinois State RedbirdsLoyola RamblersNorthern Illinois HuskiesNorthwestern WildcatsSIU Edwardsville CougarsSouthern Illinois SalukisUIC FlamesWestern Illinois LeathernecksNCAADivision IILewis FlyersMcKendree BearcatsQuincy HawksUIS Prairie StarsNCAADivision IIIAugustana VikingsAurora SpartansBenedictine EaglesBlackburn BeaversConcordia CougarsChicago MaroonsDominican StarsElmhurst BluejaysEureka Red DevilsGreenville PanthersIllinois College Blueboys and Lady BluesIllinois Tech Scarlet HawksIllinois Wesleyan TitansKnox Prairie FireLake Forest ForestersMonmouth Fighting ScotsMillikin Big BlueNorth Central CardinalsNorth Park VikingsPrincipia PanthersRockford RegentsWheaton ThunderNAIAGovernors State JaguarsJudson EaglesLincoln Christian Red LionsOlivet Nazarene TigersRoosevelt LakersSt. Francis Fighting SaintsSaint Xavier CougarsTrinity Christian TrollsTrinity International TrojansPortals:\u00a0Basketball\u00a0Chicago\u00a0IllinoisAuthority control databases InternationalVIAFNationalIsraelUnited StatesRetrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chicago_Bulls&oldid=1220564546\""},{"link": "https://en.wikipedia.org//wiki/Bill_Cartwright", "content": "American basketball player and coachFor other people named Bill Cartwright, see Bill Cartwright (disambiguation).Bill CartwrightCartwright in 2011Personal informationBorn (1957-07-30) July 30, 1957 (age\u00a066)Lodi, California, U.S.Listed height7\u00a0ft 1\u00a0in (2.16\u00a0m)Listed weight245\u00a0lb (111\u00a0kg)Career informationHigh schoolElk Grove (Elk Grove, California)CollegeSan Francisco (1975\u20131979)NBA draft1979: 1st  round, 3rd overall pickSelected by the New York KnicksPlaying career1979\u20131995PositionCenterNumber25, 24Coaching career1996\u20132013Career historyAs player:1979\u20131988New York Knicks1988\u20131994Chicago Bulls1994\u20131995Seattle SuperSonicsAs coach:1996\u20132001Chicago Bulls (assistant)2001\u20132003Chicago Bulls2004\u20132008New Jersey Nets (assistant)2008\u20132012Phoenix Suns (assistant)2013Osaka EvessaCareer highlights and awardsAs player:3\u00d7 NBA champion (1991\u20131993)NBA All-Star (1980)NBA All-Rookie First Team (1980)2\u00d7 Consensus second-team All-American (1977, 1979)3\u00d7 WCAC Player of the Year (1977\u20131979)3\u00d7 First-team All-WCAC (1977\u20131979)Second-team All-WCAC (1976)No. 24 retired by San Francisco DonsMr. Basketball USA (1975)First-team Parade All-American (1975)Third-team Parade All-American (1974)2\u00d7 California Mr. Basketball (1974, 1975)As assistant coach:2\u00d7 NBA champion (1997, 1998)Career   statisticsPoints12,713 (13.2 ppg)Rebounds6,106 (6.3 rpg)Assists1,390 (1.4 apg)Stats\u00a0 at NBA.comStats\u00a0 at Basketball-Reference.comJames William Cartwright (born July 30, 1957) is an American former professional basketball player and a former head coach of the Chicago Bulls of the National Basketball Association (NBA). A 7'1\" (2.16 m) center, he played 16 seasons for the New York Knicks, Chicago Bulls and Seattle SuperSonics, helping the Bulls capture consecutive championships in the 1991, 1992 and 1993 seasons. He attended Elk Grove High School in Elk Grove, California, and played college basketball at the University of San Francisco.Early life[edit]James William Cartwright was born to James and Marie Cartwright on July 30, 1957 in Lodi, California.[1][2][3]In high school, Cartwright played basketball for the Elk Grove Thundering Herd under coach Dan Risley. With Cartwright on the squad, the team went undefeated in the 1973-1974 season and was named the best high school basketball team in California in both 1974 and 1975. In 1975, Elk Grove won the NorCal Tournament of Champions.[4] In 1974 and 1975, Cartwright was named California High School State Basketball Player of the Year. In 1975, he was named California High School Sports Athlete of the Year.[5]As a prep star, Cartwright was just as highly regarded as fellow preps Darryl Dawkins and Bill Willoughby.[6]Cartwright graduated from Elk Grove High School in 1975.[4]College basketball career[edit]Cartwright played college basketball at the University of San Francisco and was a consensus second-team all-American in 1977 and 1979.  During his time at USF, Cartwright played on one of the tallest starting lineups in collegiate history.  He graduated as the all-time leading scorer for the Dons, averaging 19.1 points and 10.2 rebounds per game. Cartwright led San Francisco to three trips to the NCAA tournament, to the first round in the 1977 and to the Sweet Sixteen in both 1978 and 1979.[7][failed verification]YearTeam W-LGFGFGAFG%FTFTAFT%RBsAvgPtsAvg197622\u201383015128253.0729873.52076.937412.5197729\u201323124142656.611816173.32628.560019.4197823\u201362116825266.79613173.321310.243220.6197922\u201372926844360.617423773.445515.771024.5Total96\u201323111828140658.946062773.4113710.2211619.1Professional career[edit]New York Knicks (1979\u20131988)[edit]Cartwright was the third overall pick in the 1979 NBA draft selected by the New York Knicks, making his only career All-Star Game appearance in his first season.[8] He averaged more than 20 points per game in his first two seasons for the Knicks, but after playing no fewer than 77 games in his first five seasons, a series of foot injuries caused him to miss the entire 1984\u20131985 season.[9] Following that season, the Knicks drafted center Patrick Ewing with the number-one overall pick in the 1985 NBA draft. However, ongoing foot problems limited Cartwright to only two appearances during the 1985\u20131986 season.[10][11] When Cartwright returned for the 1986\u20131987 season, he and Ewing would often start and play together but during the 1987\u20131988 season Cartwright was relegated to the bench.[12]Chicago Bulls (1988\u20131994)[edit]Cartwright playing for the Chicago Bulls in 1991On June 15, 1988, Cartwright was traded, along with two draft picks, to the Chicago Bulls for forward Charles Oakley and two draft picks.[13] The Bulls were willing to part with Oakley, the league's second-leading rebounder in the 1986\u201387 and 1987\u201388 seasons, because of their need for a center and the rapid development of power forward Horace Grant.[14] Cartwright was the Bulls' starting center during their string of three consecutive NBA championships in 1991, 1992 and 1993. During the 1992\u201393 season, Cartwright took an elbow to the throat during a regular-season game against the Indiana Pacers that fractured his larynx and left him with a hoarse voice.[15]The Bulls, who were without Michael Jordan the following season following his retirement, made the 1994 NBA playoffs but were eliminated in a controversial game 7 in the Eastern Conference semifinals by the Knicks. Cartwright departed the team thereafter as an unrestricted free agent.Seattle SuperSonics (1994\u20131995)[edit]Cartwright left the Bulls as a free agent and signed with the Seattle SuperSonics. He only played in 29 games for the Sonics, and retired after the 1994\u201395 NBA season.Coaching career[edit]A year after his retirement, Cartwright joined the Bulls once again as an assistant coach under Phil Jackson ahead of the 1996\u201397 NBA season. He was a member of the championship-winning teams in 1997 and 1998. The Bulls went through significant changes following the 1997\u201398 season, with not only Jordan and Pippen leaving, but Tim Floyd taking over as head coach from Jackson. The Bulls had a lengthy rebuilding effort, and Cartwright took over the Bulls 27 games into the 2001\u201302 season, going 17\u201338 after the team's 4\u201323 start under Floyd and interim head coach Bill Berry, the latter whom coached for two games before Cartwright was named interim head coach. The Bulls finished 21\u201361 on the year and the following season Cartwright was promoted from interim to permanent head coach. In the 2002\u201303 season the Bulls finished 30\u201352, but Cartwright would last only 14 games into the 2003\u201304 season \u2014 going 4\u201310 \u2014 before being fired.[16] Pete Myers and finally Scott Skiles coached the Bulls immediately following Cartwright's tenure.In 2004, the New Jersey Nets hired Cartwright as an assistant coach under Lawrence Frank. In 2008, Cartwright was named as an assistant coach for the Phoenix Suns under Terry Porter. Suns general manager Steve Kerr hired the former big man to help coach veteran big man Shaquille O'Neal, all-star Amar'e Stoudemire, and upcoming draft picks.[17] After the Suns dismissed Porter and promoted assistant Alvin Gentry, Cartwright stayed on as assistant coach with the team.In January 2013, Cartwright was hired to coach Osaka Evessa in Japan.[18][19][20]In September 2014, Cartwright was hired as the head coach of the Mexico National Basketball Team.Personal life[edit]Cartwright married his junior high school sweetheart, Sheri, and together they have four children (Justin, Jason, James and Kristin). He also has two grandkids. He earned a bachelor's degree in sociology from USF and later obtained a master's degree in organization development in 1998 from the same institution. In 2016, Cartwright became USF\u2019s director of university initiatives.[21]Cartwright is an avid fan of doo-wop music from the 1950s and 1960s,[22] and plays guitar and collects transistor radios as hobbies.[23][24]NBA career statistics[edit]Legend\u00a0\u00a0GPGames played\u00a0\u00a0GS\u00a0Games started\u00a0MPG\u00a0Minutes per game\u00a0FG%\u00a0Field goal percentage\u00a03P%\u00a03-point field goal percentage\u00a0FT%\u00a0Free throw percentage\u00a0RPG\u00a0Rebounds per game\u00a0APG\u00a0Assists per game\u00a0SPG\u00a0Steals per game\u00a0BPG\u00a0Blocks per game\u00a0PPG\u00a0Points per game\u00a0Bold\u00a0Career high\u00a0\u2020\u00a0Won an NBA championshipRegular season[edit]YearTeamGPGSMPGFG%3P%FT%RPGAPGSPGBPGPPG1979\u201380New York8238.4.547\u2013.7978.92.00.61.221.71980\u201381New York8235.7.554.000.7887.51.40.61.020.11981\u201382New York725028.6.562\u2013.7635.81.20.70.914.41982\u201383New York828230.1.566\u2013.7447.21.70.51.515.71983\u201384New York777732.3.561.000.8058.41.40.61.317.01985\u201386New York2018.0.429\u2013.6005.02.50.50.56.01986\u201387New York585034.3.531\u2013.7907.71.70.70.417.51987\u201388New York82420.4.544\u2013.7984.71.00.50.511.11988\u201389Chicago787629.9.475\u2013.7666.71.20.30.512.41989\u201390Chicago717130.4.488\u2013.8116.52.00.50.511.41990\u201391\u2020Chicago797928.8.490\u2013.6976.21.60.40.29.61991\u201392\u2020Chicago646423.0.467\u2013.6045.11.40.30.28.01992\u201393\u2020Chicago636319.9.411\u2013.7353.71.30.30.25.61993\u201394Chicago424118.6.513\u2013.6843.61.40.20.25.61994\u201395Seattle291914.8.391\u2013.6253.00.30.20.12.4Career96367628.5.525.000.7716.31.40.50.713.2All-Star1014.0.500\u2013\u20133.01.00.00.08.0Playoffs[edit]YearTeamGPGSMPGFG%3P%FT%RPGAPGSPGBPGPPG1981New York224.5.353\u2013.6676.50.50.50.510.01983New York628.7.581\u2013.7735.70.70.51.211.21984New York1233.2.556\u2013.8638.30.40.21.217.41988New York4019.0.500\u2013.7334.81.50.00.87.31989Chicago171734.3.486\u2013.7007.11.20.50.711.81990Chicago161628.9.413\u2013.6744.71.00.30.38.11991\u2020Chicago171730.1.519\u2013.6884.71.90.50.49.51992\u2020Chicago222237.8.474\u2013.4194.51.70.50.25.61993\u2020Chicago191923.4.465\u2013.7784.51.50.60.26.31994Chicago9821.0.326\u2013.8134.91.20.30.24.6Career1249928.2.482\u2013.7255.41.30.40.58.9Head coaching record[edit]LegendRegular seasonGGames coachedWGames wonLGames lostW\u2013L\u00a0%Win\u2013loss\u00a0%PlayoffsPGPlayoff gamesPWPlayoff winsPLPlayoff lossesPW\u2013L\u00a0%Playoff win\u2013loss\u00a0%NBA[edit]TeamYearGWLW\u2013L%FinishPGPWPLPW\u2013L%ResultChicago2001\u201302551738.3098th in Central\u2014\u2014\u2014\u2014Missed playoffsChicago2002\u201303823052.3666th in Central\u2014\u2014\u2014\u2014Missed playoffsChicago2003\u20130414410.286(fired)\u2014\u2014\u2014\u2014\u2014Career15151100.338\u2014\u2014\u2014\u2014Japan[edit]TeamYearGWLW\u2013L%FinishPGPWPLPW\u2013L%ResultOsaka Evessa201321156.7147th in Western\u2014\u2014\u2014\u2014Missed playoffsSee also[edit]List of NCAA Division I men's basketball players with 2000 points and 1000 reboundsReferences[edit]^ McDermott, Barry (February 24, 1975). \"A high road for a hot high-schooler\". Vault.SI.com.^ \"Bill Cartwright\". www.nba.com. Retrieved August 19, 2023.^ \"The Unbeatable Bill Cartwright: A Biography of Triumph\". SportsBiography.com. April 20, 2023.^ a b \"Local basketball legend reunites with champion Herd team\". Elk Grove Citizen. July 19, 2019.^ \"Cartwright selected to inaugural section Hall of Fame\". Elk Grove Citizen. April 27, 2010.^ \"1975 Parade All-American\". St. Louis Post-Dispatch. March 23, 1975. p.\u00a0226. Retrieved October 27, 2020.^ Men's basketball finest ncaa.org^ \"Bill Cartwright Stats\". Basketball-Reference.com. Retrieved May 12, 2020.^ Sullivan, Paul (June 17, 1991). \"CARTWRIGHT THE ONE LEFT STANDING\". chicagotribune.com. Retrieved May 12, 2020.^ Johnson, Roy S. (January 28, 1986). \"Cartwright Likely to Be Lost for Season\". The New York Times. ISSN\u00a00362-4331. Retrieved May 12, 2020.^ \"Knicks Top Even Themselves for Injuries\". Los Angeles Times. April 6, 1986. Retrieved May 12, 2020.^ \"The Life and Times of Mr. Bill \u2013 Chicago Bulls History\". History.Bulls.com. January 15, 2018. Retrieved May 12, 2020.^ \"Charles Oakley Stats\". BasketballReference.com. Retrieved August 19, 2023.^ \"YEAR-BY-YEAR HISTORY OF THE CHICAGO BULLS\". NBA.com. Retrieved June 16, 2015.^ Sherwin, Bob (November 3, 1994). \"Bill Cartwright \u2013 Elbowing Way To Top \u2013 When Sonic Center's Around, Foes Have A Lot To Think About\". The Seattle Times. Retrieved December 19, 2013.^ \"Cartwright Relieved as Bulls Head Coach\". NBA. December 19, 2013.^ Coro, Paul (June 19, 2008). \"Suns fill out coaching staff\". The Arizona Republic. Retrieved May 3, 2012.^ \"Cartwright hired to coach Osaka team in Japan\". ESPN.com. January 22, 2013.^ \"Cartwright gives parting thoughts on experience in Japan\". www.japantimes.co.jp. May 8, 2013. Retrieved June 16, 2015.^ \"Osaka coach Cartwright puts focus on fundamentals\". www.japantimes.co.jp. February 3, 2013. Archived from the original on August 6, 2022. Retrieved June 16, 2015.^ Carpenter, Ed (March 8, 2016). \"NBA Star Bill Cartwright Named USF Ambassador\". USFCA.edu. Retrieved May 3, 2020.^ Faraudo, Jeff (March 7, 2020). \"Five Questions... Bill Cartwright, USF Dons\". wccsports.com. Retrieved October 27, 2020.^ Coro, Paul (July 1, 2008). \"Cartwright a big-man coach, more\". The Arizona Republic. Retrieved May 3, 2012.^ Coro, Paul (December 30, 2010). \"Suns Extra: Q & A with assistant coach Bill Cartwright\". The Arizona Republic. Retrieved May 3, 2012.External links[edit]Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bill Cartwright.Official websiteOfficial NBA bioCareer statisticsLinks to related articlesvteChicago Bulls head coachesJohnny Kerr (1966\u20131968)Dick Motta (1968\u20131976)Ed Badger (1976\u20131978)Larry Costello (1978\u20131979)Scotty Robertson # (1979)Jerry Sloan (1979\u20131982)Phil Johnson # (1982)Rod Thorn # (1982)Paul Westhead (1982\u20131983)Kevin Loughery (1983\u20131985)Stan Albeck (1985\u20131986)Doug Collins (1986\u20131989)Phil Jackson (1989\u20131998)Tim Floyd (1998\u20132001)Bill Berry # (2001)Bill Cartwright (2001\u20132003)Pete Myers # (2003)Scott Skiles (2003\u20132007)Pete Myers # (2007)Jim Boylan # (2007\u20132008)Vinny Del Negro (2008\u20132010)Tom Thibodeau (2010\u20132015)Fred Hoiberg (2015\u20132018)Jim Boylen (2018\u20132020)Billy Donovan (2020\u2013 )# denotes interim head coachvteChicago Bulls 1990\u201391 NBA champions2 Hopson5 Paxson10 Armstrong14 Hodges23 Jordan (Finals MVP)24 Cartwright32 Perdue33 Pippen34 King42 Williams53 Levingston54 GrantHead coach: JacksonAssistant coaches: BachCleamonsWinterRegular seasonPlayoffsvteChicago Bulls 1991\u201392 NBA champions5 Paxson10 Armstrong14 Hodges20 Hansen21 King23 Jordan (Finals MVP)24 Cartwright32 Perdue33 Pippen42 Williams53 Levingston54 GrantHead coach: JacksonAssistant coaches: BachCleamonsWinterRegular seasonPlayoffsvteChicago Bulls 1992\u201393 NBA champions5 Paxson6 Tucker10 Armstrong12 Williams20 Walker21 King22 McCray23 Jordan (Finals MVP)24 Cartwright32 Perdue33 Pippen42 Williams45 Nealy54 GrantHead coach JacksonAssistant coaches BachCleamonsWinterRegular seasonPlayoffsvteChicago Bulls 1996\u201397 NBA champions00 Parish1 Brown7 Kuko\u010d9 Harper13 Longley18 Williams23 Jordan (Finals MVP)25 Kerr30 Buechler33 Pippen34 Wennington35 Caffey91 RodmanHead coach: JacksonAssistant coaches: CartwrightHamblenRodgersWinterRegular seasonPlayoffsvteChicago Bulls 1997\u201398 NBA champions1 Brown7 Kuko\u010d8 Simpkins9 Harper13 Longley22 Booth23 Jordan (Finals MVP)24 Burrell25 Kerr30 Buechler33 Pippen34 Wennington53 Kleine91 RodmanHead coach: JacksonAssistant coaches: CartwrightHamblenRodgersWinterRegular seasonPlayoffsvteMr. Basketball USA winners1955: Chamberlain1956: Robertson1957: Lucas1958: Lucas1959: Raftery1960: Hawkins1961: Bradley1962: Russell1963: Lacy1964: Alcindor1965: Alcindor1966: Murphy1967: Haywood1968: Westphal1969: McGinnis1970: McMillen1971: Lucas1972: Buckner1973: Dantley1974: Malone1975: Cartwright1976: Griffith1977: King1978: Aguirre1979: Kellogg1980: Rivers1981: Ewing1982: Tisdale1983: R. Williams1984: J. Williams1985: Ferry1986: Reid1987: Johnson1988: Mourning1989: Anderson1990: Bailey1991: Webber1992: Kidd1993: Wallace1994: Lopez1995: Garnett1996: Bibby1997: McGrady1998: Lewis1999: Bender2000: Miles2001: Wagner2002: James2003: James2004: Telfair2005: Ellis2006: Oden2007: Mayo2008: Jennings2009: Favors2010: Barnes2011: Kidd-Gilchrist2012: Muhammad2013: Wiggins2014: Alexander2015: Simmons2016: Ball2017: Porter2018: Barrett2019: Stewart2020: Cunningham2021: Holmgren2022: Whitehead2023: Boozervte1977 NCAA Men's Basketball Consensus All-AmericansFirst TeamKent BensonOtis BirdsongPhil FordRickey GreenMarques JohnsonBernard KingSecond TeamGreg BallardBill CartwrightRod GriffinErnie GrunfeldPhil HubbardButch LeeMychal Thompsonvte1979 NCAA Men's Basketball Consensus All-AmericansFirst TeamLarry BirdMike GminskiDavid GreenwoodEarvin JohnsonSidney MoncriefSecond TeamBill CartwrightCalvin NattMike O'KorenJim PaxsonJim SpanarkelKelly TripuckaSly WilliamsvteWest Coast Conference Men's Basketball Player of the Year1953: Sears 1954: None selected 1955: Sears 1956: Russell 1957: Farmer 1958: Farmer & Wright 1959: Doss & Wright 1960: Grote 1961: Meschery 1962: Dinnel & Gray 1963: Gray 1964: Johnson 1965: Johnson 1966: Swagerty 1967: Swagerty 1968: Adelman 1969: Awtrey 1970: Awtrey 1971: Gianelli 1972: Stewart 1973: Averitt 1974: Oleynick 1975: Sobers 1976: Leite 1977: Cartwright 1978: Cartwright 1979: Cartwright 1980: Rambis 1981: Dailey 1982: Dailey 1983: Phillips & Suttle 1984: Stockton 1985: Polee 1986: Polee 1987: Thompson 1988: Middlebrooks 1989: Gathers 1990: Kimble 1991: Christie 1992: Christie 1993: D. Jones 1994: Brown 1995: Nash 1996: Nash 1997: Garnett 1998: Hendrix 1999: Schraeder 2000: K. Jones 2001: Calvary 2002: Dickau 2003: Stepp 2004: Stepp 2005: Turiaf 2006: Morrison 2007: Denison & Raivio 2008: Pargo 2009: Bryant 2010: Bouldin 2011: McConnell2012: Dellavedova2013: Olynyk2014: Haws2015: Pangos2016: Collinsworth2017: Williams-Goss2018: Landale2019: Hachimura2020: Petru\u0161ev2021: Kispert2022: Timme2023: Podziemski & Timme 2024: Mar\u010diulionisvte1979 NBA draftFirst roundMagic JohnsonDavid GreenwoodBill CartwrightGreg KelserSidney MoncriefJames BaileyVinnie JohnsonCalvin NattLarry DemicRoy HamiltonCliff RobinsonJim PaxsonDudley BradleyBrad HollandPhil HubbardJim SpanarkelLee JohnsonReggie KingWiley PeckLarry KnightSly WilliamsKyle MacySecond roundTico BrownJohnny HighOliver MackBruce FlowersReggie CarterDanny SalisburyTony PriceGary GarlandEdgar JonesTony ZenoLawrence ButlerKim GoetzJames BradleyClint RichardsonBernard TooneLarry WilsonVictor KingAndrew FieldsMark YoungPaul MokeskiJohnny MooreJoe DeSantisRetrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bill_Cartwright&oldid=1215256759\""},{"link": "https://en.wikipedia.org//wiki/Sports_governing_body", "content": "Sports organizationThis article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources:\u00a0\"Sports governing body\"\u00a0\u2013\u00a0news\u00a0\u00b7 newspapers\u00a0\u00b7 books\u00a0\u00b7 scholar\u00a0\u00b7 JSTOR (February 2012) (Learn how and when to remove this message)A sports governing body is a sports organization that has a regulatory or sanctioning function.Sports governing bodies come in various forms and have a variety of regulatory functions, including disciplinary action for rule infractions and deciding on rulechanges in the sport that they govern. Governing bodies have different scopes. They may cover a range of sport at an internationally acceptable level, such as the International Olympic Committee and the International Paralympic Committee, or only a single sport at a national level, such as the Rugby Football League. National bodies will largely have to be affiliated with international bodies for the same sport. The first international federations were formed at the end of the 20th century.Types of sports governing bodies[edit]Every sport has a different governing body that can define the way that the sport operates through its affiliated clubs and societies. This is because sports have different levels of difficulty and skill, so they can try to organize the people playing their sport by ability and by age. The different types of sport governing bodies are all shown below:International sports federations[edit]International sports federations are non-governmental non-profit organizations for a given sport (or a group of similar sport disciplines, such as aquatics or skiing) and administers its sport at the highest level.[1] These federations work to create a common set of rules, promote their sport, and organize international competitions. International sports federations represent their sport at the Olympic level where applicable.About 30 international sport federations are located in Switzerland, with about 20 or so in the Lausanne area, where the International Olympic Committee is located.[1]International federations for sports that do not participate in the Olympic Games are managed by equivalent organisations to the International Olympic Committee, such as the Global Association of International Sports Federations.International federations are typically organized with legislative and executive branches at the top. The legislative body is usually referred to as a congress or general assembly of the international federation and is responsible for defining its sports policies. It consists of all of the national federations, each of which receives one vote. On the other hand, the executive branch, which is often referred to as the council or executive committee, consists of elected members by the legislative branch and is responsible for directing, managing, and representing their federation.[1]Trusts[edit]Trusts are organizations or groups that have control over the money that will be used to help someone else, such as the Youth Sport Trust.National governing bodies[edit]The examples and perspective in this section deal primarily with the United Kingdom and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject. You may improve this section, discuss the issue on the talk page, or create a new section, as appropriate. (February 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this message)National governing bodies have the same objectives as those of an international federation, but within the scope of one country, or even part of a country, as the name implies. They support local clubs and are often responsible for national teams. National Olympic Committees and National Paralympic Committees are both a type of national federation, as they are responsible for a country's participation in the Olympic Games and in the Paralympic Games respectively. However, a national governing body (NGB) can be different from a national federation due to government recognition requirements.[2] Also, national governing bodies can be a supraorganization representing a range of unrelated organizations operating in a particular sport, as evident in the example of the Northern Ireland Federation of Sub-Aqua Clubs.Event organizers[edit]Multi-sport event organizers are responsible for the organization of an event that includes more than one sport. The best-known example is the International Olympic Committee (IOC), the organizer of the modern Olympic Games. General sports organizations are responsible for sports-related topics, usually for a certain group, such as the Catholic or Jewish sports groups. General sports organizations and multi-sport events also exist for other groups such as the Invictus Games for military veterans.Professional leagues[edit]Professional sports leagues are usually the highest level of play in sport, specifically if they consist of the best players around the world in a certain sport. Because of this, they usually work with national or international federations, but there is usually a separation between the different federations. Most North American professional leagues usually do not have amateur divisions, as the amateur divisions are mostly run in separate leagues. Also, most professional leagues are related to other leagues, as players usually attempt to play in the league with the highest level of play. Because of this, promotion and relegation can occur; or, in league systems without promotion and relegation, clubs in professional leagues can have a team in the minor leagues. This enables them to shuffle players who are not doing well to the minor leagues, which will inspire them to contribute more to the team by playing better.Criticisms[edit]A 2014 study by the Institute for Human Rights and Business (IHRB) criticized major international sports governing bodies including the International Olympic Committee and FIFA for not having sufficient provisions for human and labor rights.[3]See also[edit]Sports portalRegulation of sportList of international sports federationsReferences[edit]^ a b c Chappelet, J.-L. (2008). The International Olympic Committee and the Olympic System\u00a0: the governance of world sport (PDF). London: Routledge. ISBN\u00a0978-0-203-89317-3. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2022-10-09. Retrieved 18 April 2021.^ \"How we recognise sports\". Sport England. Archived from the original on 22 December 2012. Retrieved 10 November 2012.^ Amis, Lucy (May 2014). \"Sports Governing Bodies and Human Rights\" (PDF). Institute for Human Rights and Business (IHRB). Archived (PDF) from the original on 2022-10-09. Retrieved April 18, 2021.vteInternational sports federationsASOIF (30)Summer Olympics FederationsWAqu (aquatic sports)WA (archery)WAth (athletics)BWF (badminton)FIBA (basketball)ICF (canoeing)UCI (cycling)FEI (equestrian)FIE (fencing)FIFA (football)IGF (golf)FIG (gymnastics)IHF (handball)FIH (field hockey)IJF (judo)UIPM (modern pentathlon)WSK (roller sports)FISA (rowing)WR (rugby union)WS (sailing)ISSF (shooting)IFSC (sport climbing)ISA (surfing)ITTF (table tennis)WT (taekwondo)ITF (tennis)WT (triathlon)FIVB (volleyball)IWF (weightlifting)UWW (wrestling)AIOWF (7)Winter Olympics FederationsIBU (biathlon)IBSF (bobsleigh and skeleton)WC (curling)IIHF (ice hockey)FIL (luge)ISU (skating sports)FIS (skiing and snowboarding sports)ARISF (39)Others recognised by IOCFAI (air sports)IFAF (American football)FIA (auto racing)FIB (bandy)WBSC (baseball, softball and Baseball5)FIPV (basque pelota)WCBS (billiards sports)CMSB (boules)IBF (bowling)WBF (bridge)ICU (cheer)FIDE (chess)ICC (cricket)WDSF (dance sport)IFF (floorball)WFDF (flying disc)IFI (ice stock sport)WKF (karate)WAKO (kickboxing)IKF (korfball)FIL (lacrosse)ILSF (life saving)FIM (motorcycle sport)UIAA (mountaineering)IFMA (muaythai)WN (netball)IOF (orienteering)FIP (polo)UIM (powerboating)IRF (racquetball)FIAS (sambo)ISMF (ski mountaineering)WSF (squash)IFS (sumo)TWIF (tug-of-war)CMAS (underwater sports)FISU (university sports)IWWF (waterski and wakeboard)IWUF (wushu)AIMS (20)Others in GAISF / SportAccordIAF (aikido)WAF (arm wrestling)IFBB (bodybuilding)ICSF (casting)WDF (darts)IDBF (dragon boat)FMJD (draughts)IFA (fistball)IGF (go)JJIF (ju-jitsu)FIK (kendo)WMF (minigolf)IPF (powerlifting)IPSC (practical shooting)FISav (savate)ISTAF (sepak takraw)ISFF (sleddog)ISTF (soft tennis)CIPS (sport fishing)FITEQ (teqball)GAISF observer members (11)WDA (dodgeball)FIFG (footgolf)IJRU (jump rope)IUKL (kettlebell lifting)FISO (obstacle)IPF (padel)IFMP (poker)IPSF (pole dance)IRF (rafting)IRL (rugby league)ITSF (table football/soccer)OthersWEKAF (arnis)AFLC (Australian rules football)WBGF (backgammon)ISBHF (ball hockey)IBA (bodyboarding)WB (bowls)IBA1 (boxing)WB2 (boxing)SJJIF (Brazilian jiu-jitsu)IFBA (broomball)WCF (croquet)WDBF (dodgeball)ICFRA (fullbore rifle)IGAA (Gaelic football and hurling)ATSX (downhill ice cross)IKF (kabaddi)IKF (kempo)FISLY (landsailing)IMMAF (mixed martial arts)WMRA (mountain running)ORSI (ocean rowing)IFP (pickleball)IQA (quidditch)IFMAR (radio-controlled racing)IRF (rogaining)WSSF (snowshoe running)ISF (skyrunning)WSSA (sport stacking)ITHF (table hockey)ITPF (tent pegging)FIT (touch football)ITRA (trail running)IAU (ultra running)International Olympic CommitteeInternational World Games AssociationGlobal Association of International Sports Federations1 IOC recognition withdrawn2 Seeking IOC recognitionvteSportTypesIndividualTeamMilitary sportsParasportsWomenProfessionalSemi-professionalAmateurScienceExerciseBiomechanicsPracticePeriodizationPhysiologyStrength trainingDopingMedicineAthletic trainingChriopracticInjuryPhysiciansPsychologyNutritionBodybuilding supplementsSports drinkPedagogyPhysical educationPhysical activityRating systemSociologyOrganizationsClubsGoverning bodiesLeaguesSeasonPostseasonSchoolTeamsInternationalBusinessAgentsBroadcastingEconomicsIndustryMarketingSponsorshipTradeCommunicationGeneral managersJournalismMagazinesPodcastsRadioPromotersCultureBettingCheerleadersEntertainmentFanHistoryMemorabiliaNamingNicknamesNumberingOlympic culturePhilosophyRivalriesSports mascotsSportsmanshipViolenceEquipmentArtificial turfBallsCavingExerciseFlying discSportswearPoliticsSports lawMinistriesNational sportRegulationSport by regionAfricaAustraliaAsiaEuropeNorth AmericaOceaniaSouth America\u00a0Sports portal Category OutlineAuthority control databases NationalGermanyOtherHistorical Dictionary of SwitzerlandRetrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sports_governing_body&oldid=1186398885\""},{"link": "https://en.wikipedia.org//wiki/FIBA", "content": "International basketball governing bodyThis article is about the basketball organization. For other uses, see Fiba (disambiguation).For the international governing body that oversees association football, see FIFA.International Basketball FederationF\u00e9d\u00e9ration internationale de basket-ball(FIBA)AbbreviationFIBAPredecessorInternational Amateur Handball FederationFormation18\u00a0June 1932; 91 years ago\u00a0(1932-06-18)Founded atGeneva, SwitzerlandTypeSports federationHeadquartersMies, SwitzerlandRegion served WorldwideMembership  212 national federationsOfficial languages EnglishFrench[1]PresidentSheikh Saud Ali Al ThaniSecretary generalAndreas Zagklis[2]Key peopleBorislav Stankovi\u0107George VassilakopoulosManfred Str\u00f6herRevenue (2018) US$102.2 million[3]Expenses (2018)US$107.74 million[3]WebsiteFIBA.basketballFIBA headquarters in Mies, SwitzerlandThe International Basketball Federation (FIBA /\u02c8fi\u02d0b\u0259/ FEE-b\u0259; French: F\u00e9d\u00e9ration internationale de basketball)[a][4] is an association of national organizations which governs the sport of basketball worldwide. FIBA defines the rules of basketball, specifies the equipment and facilities required, organizes international competitions, regulates the transfer of athletes across countries, and controls the appointment of international referees. A total of 212 national federations are  members, organized since 1989 into five zones: Africa, Americas, Asia, Europe, and Oceania.FIBA organizes both the men's and women's FIBA World Olympic Qualifying Tournament and the Summer Olympics Basketball Tournament, which are sanctioned by the IOC.[5] The FIBA Basketball World Cup is a world tournament for men's national teams held every four years. Teams compete for the Naismith Trophy, named in honor of basketball's Canadian-American creator James Naismith. The tournament structure is similar but not identical to that of the FIFA World Cup in association football; these tournaments occurred in the same year from 1970 through 2014, but starting in 2019, the Basketball World Cup will move to the year following the FIFA World Cup. A parallel event for women's teams, the FIBA Women's Basketball World Cup, is also held quadrennial; from 1986 through 2014, it was held in the same year as the men's event but in a different country.History[edit]1932\u201349; founding and early years[edit]The association was founded in Geneva in 1932, two years after the sport was officially recognized by the IOC. Before 1934, basketball was under the umbrella of the International Amateur Handball Federation. Its original name was F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale de basket-ball amateur. The eight nation's basketball federations that were the founding members of FIBA were: Argentina, Czechoslovakia, Greece, Italy, Latvia, Portugal, Romania, and Switzerland. In September 1934 the Protocol of Stockholm was passed and the FIBB became the only recognized authority responsible for basketball. During the 1936 Summer Olympics held in Berlin, the Federation named James Naismith (1861\u20131939), the founder of basketball, as its Honorary President.Development (1950\u20132019)[edit]FIBA has organized a world championship, known as World Cup, for men since 1950 and a women's world championship, known as the Women's World Cup, since 1953. From 1986 through 2014, both events were held every four years, alternating with the Olympics.[6] The men's World Cup was moved to a new four-year cycle, with tournaments in the year before the Summer Olympics, after 2014.On 7 April 1989, at a special congress in Munich following the 1988\u201389 FIBA European Champions Cup finals, FIBA delegates voted, by a margin of 56 to 13, to allow professional basketball players to participate in its international events, including the World Cup and the Olympics. The decision led to professional players, particularly those from the United States' National Basketball Association, dominating the sport at the highest levels of international competition. The United States delegation opposed the change, but many other countries sought to benefit from it by recruiting NBA players who hailed from their countries. The change also warded off competition from the Goodwill Games, the biggest rival of the Olympics at the time, which was seeking to bring professional players into its basketball events.[7][8][9]The Federation headquarters moved to Munich in 1956, then returned to Geneva in 2002. In 1991, it founded the FIBA Hall of Fame; the first induction ceremony was held on 12 September 2007, during EuroBasket 2007. During its 81st anniversary in 2013, FIBA moved into its new headquarters, \"The House of Basketball\", at Mies.[10] Andreas Zagklis became the Secretary-General of FIBA on 7 December 2018.2020\u2013present; suspensions of Russia and Belarus[edit]In February 2022, Russia and Belarus were suspended from international competitions until further notice due to Russia's invasion of Ukraine.[11][12] It also banned the two countries from hosting any competitions.[12]Presidents[edit]Presidents of FIBAYearsName[13]1932\u20131948 Leon Bouffard1948\u20131960 Willard Greim1960\u20131968 Antonio dos Reis Carneiro1968\u20131976 Abdel Moneim Wahby1976\u20131984 Gonzalo Puyat II1984\u20131990 Robert Busnel1990\u20131998 George E. Killian1998\u20132002 Abdoulaye Seye Moreau2002\u20132006 Ching Men-ky\u00a0[zh]2006\u20132010 Robert Elphinston2010\u20132014 Yvan Mainini2014\u20132019 Horacio Muratore2019\u20132023 Hamane Niang2023\u2013present Sheikh Saud Ali Al ThaniDuring the 1936 Summer Olympics, the FIBA honored James A. Naismith, the founder of basketball, as their honorary President.[6]Secretaries General[edit]Secretaries General of FIBAYearsName1932\u20131976 Renato William Jones1976\u20132003/ Borislav Stankovi\u01072003\u20132018 Patrick Baumann2018\u2013present Andreas ZagklisStructure[edit]Five zones and 212 national federations[edit]FIBA divides the world into 5 zones, each roughly based on a continent.There are five zones, in which FIBA oversees the game in the different continents and regions of the world through its regional offices under its new governance structure, which was approved by the 2014 FIBA Extraordinary Congress in Istanbul.[14] National federations are members of FIBA and are provided for in FIBA's General Statutes with their assigned zones.[15] The Statutes also state that upon a national federation's admission into FIBA, it is assigned to a zone by the Central Board.[16]FIBA Africa (54 members)FIBA Americas (42 members)FIBA Asia (44 members)FIBA Europe (50 members)FIBA Oceania (22 members)FIBA recognizes 212 national federations; see the list of men's national basketball teams and the list of women's national basketball teams. Unlike other sports organizations, FIBA recognizes the British Basketball Federation as the lone governing body for basketball in Great Britain, as a result of a merger in 2016 between the basketball federations of two of the four Home Nations within the United Kingdom (England and Scotland).[17] Wales had rejected the proposed merger in 2012 but agreed in 2015. Several members of FIBA Oceania, notably Australia and New Zealand, also compete in Asian tournaments.In 2021, Peru was disaffiliated from FIBA[18] after being suspended in 2018.[19]The FIBA Men's World Ranking and FIBA Women's World Ranking are both updated after a FIBA competition or qualification window and are based on their performance, particularly in games, in those events. The men's ranking was updated on 10 September 2023 after the 2023 FIBA Basketball World Cup, while the latest women's ranking was updated on 21 August 2023 after the FIBA Women's Continental Cups, which took place in all FIBA zones.Laws and governance[edit]FIBA in Mies.FIBA's headquarters is located in Mies, Switzerland and is known as the Patrick Baumann House of Basketball, named after the organization's former Secretary-General.FIBA's supreme body is the FIBA Congress, an assembly of representatives from each affiliated national federation, with each having one vote. The Congress assembles every two years, either an elective or mid-term congress, and is the only body that can make modifications to FIBA's General Statutes. An elective congress elects the FIBA President, Treasurer, and members of the FIBA Central Board, and appoints members of their Ethics and Nominations Panels.[20] Two extraordinary congresses have been held since 1989, with the most recent held in 2014.The FIBA Central Board is the organization's highest executive body. It comprises 29 people: the president; the secretary-general; the treasurer; 13 members elected by the FIBA Congress; the 5 presidents of each FIBA zone; up to six co-opted members; a representative each from the National Basketball Association and the players. The Board is the body that decides which countries will host the FIBA Basketball World Cup and the FIBA Women's Basketball World Cup. The Central Board for the term 2023-2027 comprises 27 members.The president and the secretary general are the main office holders of FIBA and are in charge of its daily administration. Sheikh Saud Ali Al Thani was elected president on 23 August 2023 at the FIBA Congress. Andreas Zagklis was appointed secretary-general on 8 December 2018 following the death of Patrick Baumann.[21]FIBA tournaments[edit]World champions[edit]TournamentFIBA World CupYearNext editionOlympicsYearMen\u00a0Germany (1)20232027\u00a0United States (16)2020Women\u00a0United States (11)20222026\u00a0United States (9)2020U-19 Men\u00a0Spain (2)20232025\u00a0Argentina (1)2018U-19 Women\u00a0United States (10)20232025\u00a0United States (2)2018U-17 Men\u00a0United States (6)20222024N/A[A]U-17 Women\u00a0United States (5)20222024^\u00a0A:\u00a0The Youth Olympic Games are a U-19 event played in FIBA 3x3 format.World club champions[edit]Club competitionYearChampionTitleRunner-upNext editionIntercontinental Cup2023-II Sesi Franca1st Telekom Baskets Bonn2024Continental champions[edit]National teamsFIBA AfricaYearNext editionFIBA AmericasYearNext editionFIBA AsiaYearNext editionFIBA EuropeYearNext editionFIBA OceaniaYearNext editionMen\u00a0Tunisia (3)20212025\u00a0Argentina (3)20222025\u00a0Australia (2)20222025\u00a0Spain (4)20222025\u00a0Australia (19)2015N/A[B]Women\u00a0Nigeria (6)20232025\u00a0Brazil (6)20232025\u00a0China (12)20232025\u00a0Belgium (1)20232025\u00a0Australia (15)2015U-19 Men\u00a0Egypt (6)20222024\u00a0United States (10)20222024\u00a0South Korea (4)20222024\u00a0Serbia (5)20232024\u00a0New Zealand (1)2016U-19 Women\u00a0Mali (8)20222024\u00a0United States (11)20222024\u00a0Australia (1)20222024\u00a0Slovenia (1)20232024\u00a0Australia (7)2016U-17 Men\u00a0Guinea (1)20232025\u00a0United States (8)20232025\u00a0Australia (3)20232024\u00a0Spain (6)20232024\u00a0Australia (6)20222024U-17 Women\u00a0Mali (8)20232025\u00a0United States (7)20232025\u00a0Australia (3)20232024\u00a0France (5)20232024\u00a0Australia (6)20222024^\u00a0B:\u00a0FIBA Oceania no longer conducts senior-level championships for either sex. Since 2017, that region's members have competed for FIBA Asia senior championships. FIBA Oceania continues to hold age-grade championships.Continental club champions[edit]RegionCompetitionYearChampionTitleRunner-upNext editionMen's club competitionsAfricaBasketball Africa League2023 Al Ahly1st AS Douanes2024AmericasBasketball Champions League Americas2022\u201323 Sesi Franca1st Flamengo2023\u201324AsiaBasketball Champions League Asia2019 Alvark Tokyo1st Al Riyadi Beirut2024Europe[C]Basketball Champions League2023\u201324 Unicaja M\u00e1laga1st Lenovo Tenerife2024\u201325Europe Cup2023\u201324 Niners Chemnitz1st Bah\u00e7e\u015fehir Koleji2024\u201325Women's club competitionsAfricaAfrica Women's Clubs Champions Cup2022 Sporting Alexandria1st Costa do Sol2023EuropeEuroLeague Women (1st-tier)2023\u201324 Fenerbah\u00e7e2nd Villeneuve d'Ascq LM2024\u201325EuroCup Women (2nd-tier)2023\u201324 London Lions1st Be\u015fikta\u015f2024\u201325SuperCup Women2023 Fenerbah\u00e7e1st ASVEL F\u00e9minin2024^\u00a0C:\u00a0The top-tier European professional basketball club competitions are complex. The EuroLeague run by Euroleague Basketball and its EuroCup are competing with the FIBA Europe organized competitions. The best European clubs have joined the closed league EuroLeague.3x3 world champions[edit]TournamentFIBA 3x3 World CupYearOlympicsYearMen\u00a0Serbia (6)2023\u00a0Latvia (1)2020Women\u00a0United States (3)2023\u00a0United States (1)2020U-23 Men\u00a0United States (1)2023 N/A U-23 Women\u00a0Netherlands (1)2023U-18 Men\u00a0Germany (1)2023U-18 Women\u00a0United States (7)2023Awards[edit]Main article: FIBA AwardsMost Valuable Player[edit]TournamentMost Recent AwardeeTeamYearMenDennis Schr\u00f6der\u00a0Germany2023WomenA'ja Wilson\u00a0United States2022U-19 MenIzan Almansa\u00a0Spain2023U-19 WomenIyana Mart\u00edn Carri\u00f3n\u00a0Spain2023U-17 MenIzan Almansa\u00a0Spain2022U-17 WomenJuJu Watkins\u00a0United States2022FIBA world rankings[edit]Men's[edit]Further information: FIBA Men's World RankingThe following table has the Top 32 men's basketball countries in the world.[22] The Top 32 is here due to the next iteration of the FIBA Basketball World Cup, the world's major tournament in men's basketball, anticipating to have 32 countries compete. As such, this table shows the projected teams in the next FIBA Men's WC based on the ranking's algorithm. This list does not consider berths given to countries based on hosting or region status.[23]Top 20 Rankings as of 1 March 2024[24]RankChangeTeamPoints1\u00a0United States784.82\u00a0Spain773.93\u00a0Germany7594 1\u00a0Serbia757.95 1\u00a0Australia756.36 2\u00a0Latvia750.67 1\u00a0Canada746.28 1\u00a0Argentina743.29\u00a0France737.110\u00a0Lithuania713.111\u00a0Slovenia703.612 1\u00a0Brazil660.413\u00a0Italy655.714\u00a0Greece641.615\u00a0Poland611.716\u00a0Puerto Rico608.417\u00a0Montenegro607.718 1\u00a0Czech Republic560.519 1\u00a0Dominican Republic556.320\u00a0Finland537.421 6\u00a0New Zealand507.222 4\u00a0Venezuela502.723 10\u00a0Georgia465.924 8\u00a0Turkey445.825 7\u00a0Mexico440.926 11\u00a0Japan432.227 4\u00a0Iran427.828 16\u00a0Lebanon423.329 1\u00a0China420.430 4\u00a0Croatia420.231 32\u00a0South Sudan375.532 1\u00a0Jordan374.6*Change from 9 August 2021Women's[edit]Further information: FIBA Women's World RankingThe following table has the Top 16 women's basketball countries in the world.[25] The Top 16 is here due to the next iteration of the FIBA Women's Basketball World Cup, the world's major tournament in women's basketball, anticipating to have 16 countries compete. As such, this table shows the projected teams in the next FIBA Women's WC based on the ranking's algorithm. This list does not consider berths given to countries based on hosting or region status.[26]Top 20 Rankings as of 15 February 2024[27]RankChangeTeamPoints1\u00a0United States834.82\u00a0China6863\u00a0Australia668.84\u00a0Spain658.15\u00a0Canada653.46\u00a0Belgium652.87\u00a0France649.28\u00a0Brazil5989\u00a0Japan594.210\u00a0Serbia580.311 1\u00a0Puerto Rico495.112 1\u00a0Nigeria490.113\u00a0South Korea444.814\u00a0Turkey405.515\u00a0Italy378.416 5\u00a0Hungary357.7*Change from 9 August 2021Sponsors of FIBA[edit]As of April 2023FIBA global partners[edit]Ganten[28]J9.com[29]Molten[30]Nike[31]Smart Communications[32]TCL Corporation[33]Tencent[34]Tissot[35]Wanda Group[36]Yili Group[37]Notes[edit]^ Originally known as the F\u00e9d\u00e9ration internationale de basketball amateur (hence FIBA), in 1989 it dropped the word amateur from its name but retained the acronym.References[edit]^ 2014 General Statutes of FIBA, Article 47.1^ \"FIBA Central Board appoints Andreas Zagklis as Secretary General\". FIBA.basketball. Archived from the original on 30 June 2021. Retrieved 7 December 2018.^ a b Perelman, Rich (24 May 2020). \"Who's in the money? EXCLUSIVE analysis of our survey of International Federation finances\". The Sports Examiner. Archived from the original on 29 May 2023. Retrieved 5 June 2022.^ \"History of FIBA\". FIBA. Retrieved 4 March 2024.^ \"Presentation\". FIBA.basketball.^ a b \"History\". FIBA. Archived from the original on 4 May 2020. Retrieved 14 June 2020.^ \"Basketball federation will allow NBA players in Olympics\", Washington Post News Service, via The Olympian, April 8, 1989, page 2C.^ Hubbard, Jan (8 April 2020). \"The Vote That Cleared the Way for NBA Players to Play in FIBA Competitions\". USA Basketball. Archived from the original on 11 April 2020. Retrieved 5 May 2020.^ \"Federation Rule Change Opens Olympics to N.B.A. Players\". The New York Times. 8 April 1989. Archived from the original on 20 September 2023. Retrieved 5 August 2020.^ \"Highlights of the Week\". Olympics. International Olympic Committee. 21 June 2013. Retrieved 31 August 2023.^ \"FIBA suspends Russian teams, officials from international basketball competitions until further notice\".^ a b \"FIBA bans Russia, Belarus from Upcoming National Basketball Team Competitions \u2013 KyivPost \u2013 Ukraine's Global Voice\". KyivPost. 18 May 2022.^ \"President of FIBA\". fiba.basketball. Archived from the original on 3 February 2018. Retrieved 11 May 2019.^ \"PR N\u00b014 \u2013 Extraordinary World Congress unanimously adopts new FIBA General Statutes\". 16 March 2014.^ \"FIBA General Statutes (2021 edition)\". 3 June 2021. p.\u00a037.^ \"FIBA General Statutes (2021 edition)\". 3 June 2021. p.\u00a021.^ Ian Parker (11 August 2012). \"Basketball: England and Scotland to formally merge at Great Britain\". The Independent.^ \"Peruvian basketball is reborn after its disaffiliation from FIBA\". 13 May 2022.^ \"FIBA's Executive Committee announces U19 World Cups hosts, looks forward to action-packed weeks ahead\". 12 December 2018.^ \"FIBA General Statutes (2021 edition)\". 3 June 2021. p.\u00a011.^ \"FIBA Central Board appoints Andreas Zagklis as Secretary General\". fiba.basketball. 7 December 2018.^ \"FIBA Rankings \u2013 Men's basketball\". International Basketball Federation. Archived from the original on 21 June 2017. Retrieved 23 May 2021.^ \"How to Qualify for the 2023 FIBA World Cup\". International Basketball Federation. Archived from the original on 19 October 2021. Retrieved 23 May 2021.^ \"FIBA Ranking Presented by Nike\". FIBA. 1 March 2024. Retrieved 1 March 2024.^ \"FIBA Rankings \u2013 Women's basketball\". International Basketball Federation. Archived from the original on 18 December 2021. Retrieved 23 May 2021.^ \"How to Qualify for the 2022 FIBA Women's World Cup\". International Basketball Federation. Retrieved 23 May 2021.^ \"FIBA Women's Ranking Presented by Nike\". FIBA. 15 February 2024. Retrieved 15 February 2024.^ \"Go-time for FIBA and Asia's biggest natural mineral water brand Ganten with Global Partnership extension\". FIBA. 8 September 2023.^ \"Global partnership with J9 set to bring fans across the globe closer to the game\". FIBA. 10 October 2021.^ \"FIBA and Molten continue to blaze their basketball trail for the next two World Cup cycles\". FIBA. 9 September 2023.^ \"FIBA signs 11-year strategic partnership with iconic basketball brand Nike\". FIBA. 27 February 2017.^ \"Smart to serve as FIBA World Cup 2027 global partner\". Tiebreaker Times. 12 September 2023. Retrieved 12 September 2023.^ \"FIBA enters global partnership agreement with electronics giant TCL\". FIBA. 3 September 2020.^ \"FIBA and Tencent announce long-term partnership until 2025\". FIBA. 18 May 2016.^ \"FIBA and Tissot partnership stands the test of time with extension until 2027\". FIBA. 8 July 2021.^ \"FIBA and Wanda Group signs landmark strategic partnership agreement\". FIBA. 31 August 2019.^ \"Asian dairy giant Yili becomes newest FIBA Global Partner\". FIBA. 26 April 2023.External links[edit]Wikimedia Commons has media related to FIBA.Official website InterBasket \u2013 International Basketball News, Blog and Forum, covering FIBA, Euroleague, NBAFIBAInternational Basketball News Archived 19 January 2022 at the Wayback MachinevteFIBAFIBA Central BoardFIBA CongressBasketball at the Summer OlympicsWorld Olympic Qualifying TournamentMen's national teamsWomen's national teamsBasketball codesRules5-on-53x3History of basketballProtocol of StockholmOutline of basketballVariations of basketballRegional officesFIBA AfricaFIBA AmericasFIBA AsiaFIBA EuropeFIBA OceaniaMen's national team tournamentsFIBA Basketball World CupUnder-19Under-17FIBA 3x3 World CupUnder-23Under-18FIBA Stankovi\u0107 CupFIBA Diamond Ball (former)Women's national team tournamentsFIBA Women's World CupUnder-19Under-17FIBA 3x3 World CupUnder-23Under-18Men's club tournamentsFIBA Intercontinental CupFIBA International Christmas Tournament (former)Women's club tournamentsFIBA Women's World League (former)PresidentsJames Naismith (1936, honorary)L\u00e9on Bouffard (1932\u20131948)Willard N. Greim (1948\u20131960)Antonio dos Reis Carneiro (1960\u20131968)Abdel Moneim Wahby (1968\u20131976)Gonzalo Puyat II (1976\u20131984)Robert Busnel (1984\u20131990)George E. Killian (1990\u20131998)Abdoulaye Seye Moreau (1998\u20132002)Carl Men-Ky Ching (2002\u20132006)Robert Elphinston (2006\u20132010)Yvan Mainini (2010\u20132014)Horacio Muratore (2014\u20132019)Hamane Niang (2019\u20132023)Sheikh Saud Ali Al Thani (2023-present)Secretaries GeneralRenato William Jones (1932\u20131976)Borislav Stankovi\u0107 (1976\u20132002)Patrick Baumann (2002\u20132018)Andreas Zagklis (2018\u2013present)AwardsFIBA Hall of FameMembersFIBA AwardsFIBA Order of MeritFIBA's 50 Greatest Players (1991)RankingsFIBA Men's World RankingFIBA Women's World RankingOthersFIBA\u2013EuroLeague disputeFIBA eligibility rulesBasketball Without BordersNaismith Trophy Basketball portal CategoryvteBasketballGeneral topicsGlossary of termsIndex of articlesLeaguesFIBANBAAAUHistoryJames NaismithProtocol of StockholmVariationsSlamballStreetballOne-on-oneTwenty-oneThree-on-threeSix-on-sixWheelchairRulesJump ballOfficialsTurnoverTrent Tucker RuleViolations3 secondsOffenseDefense5 secondsTime line (8/10 seconds)Basket interferenceCarryingDouble dribbleGoaltendingShot clockTravelingFoulsFlagrantPersonalTechnicalBonusThree-point playFour-point playGame playPositionsSixth manGuardPointShootingComboForwardSmallPowerStretchPointCenterStatisticsPlayer trackingWinning streaksOffensePointField goalThree-pointerReboundAssist50\u201340\u201390 club100-point scorersDefenseBlockStealMovesDribbleCrossoverEuro stepFlopScreenBack screenSlashingShootingFree throwJump shotFadeawayLayupFinger rollSlam dunkPosterizedAlley-oopBackboard shatteringHook shotAir ballBuzzer beaterUncontestedStrategyGeneralPlaybookPracticeShootaroundDrillsMikanTipOffenseBall hogGravityContinuityFlexShuffleUCLA High PostWheelFour cornersPick and rollTriangleMotionPrincetonDribble driveFast breakFlyCherry pickingRun and gunGrinnell SystemNellie BallSmall ballDefenseDouble teamFull-court pressHack-a-ShaqJordan RulesMan-to-manZone1\u20132\u20131\u201311\u20133\u201312\u20133LineMatch-upHybridAmoebaBox-and-oneTriangle-and-twoEquipmentBackboardBallBasketRim (Breakaway rim)CourtGlassHalf courtKeyNetWhistleClothingUniformSleeveFinger sleeveAir JordanChuck Taylor All-StarsMediaList of filmsTrading cards\u00a0Basketball portalOutline of basketballvteInternational men's basketballFIBANational teamsOlympicsWorld CupUniversiadeU-21 World CupU-19 World CupU-17 World CupDBB U-18 InvitationalTBF U-16 InvitationalWorld RankingAfricaFIBA Africa \u2013 AfroBasketAfroCanU-18U-16African GamesBasketball Africa League (BAL)AmericasFIBA Americas \u2013 FIBA AmeriCupU-18U-16CBC ChampionshipCentrobasketCOCABA ChampionshipMarchand CupPan American GamesSouth American ChampionshipBasketball Champions League Americas (BCLA)AsiaFIBA Asia \u2013 FIBA Asia Cup (includes Oceania)U-18U-16Asian GamesFIBA Asia ChallengeBasketball Champions League AsiaStankovi\u0107 CupEast Asian ChampionshipEast Asian GamesSABA ChampionshipSEABA ChampionshipSouth Asian GamesSoutheast Asian GamesWest Asian ChampionshipWest Asian GamesWilliam Jones CupASEAN Basketball LeagueEuropeFIBA Europe \u2013 EuroBasketU-20U-18U-16Acropolis TournamentAdecco CupBelgrade TrophyFIBA European Championship for Small CountriesGames of the Small States of EuropeWorld Cup (Turkey)Basketball Champions League (BCL)OceaniaFIBA Oceania \u2013 FIBA Oceania Championship (defunct)U-20U-17U-15Pacific GamesOthertournamentsFIBA Intercontinental CupArab Basketball ChampionshipArab GamesCommonwealth GamesDiamond BallFIBA World Olympic Qualifying TournamentLusophone GamesMediterranean GamesNote: The Under-21 Championship is no longer held.\u00a0Basketball portalvteInternational women's basketballFIBAWorld RankingTeamsOlympicsYouthWorld CupU21U19U17UniversiadeAfricaAfroBasket WomenU20U18U16AmericasAmeriCupU20U18U16Caribbean ChampionshipU20CentrobasketU17Central American ChampionshipU21South American Championship2nd tierU21U17U15AsiaAsia Cup (includes Oceania)U20U18U16Discovery Women's Basketball InvitationalWilliam Jones CupEuropeEuroBasket WomenU-20U-18U-16European Championship for Small CountriesOceaniaOceania Championship (defunct)U17U15Melanesia CupPolynesian CupOthertournamentsAfrican GamesArab ChampionshipArab GamesASEAN University GamesAsian GamesBolivarian GamesCentral Asian GamesCentral American and Caribbean GamesCentral American GamesCommonwealth GamesMediterranean GamesMicronesian GamesEuropean GamesEYOFGames of the Small States of EuropePacific GamesPan American GamesSoutheast Asian GamesNote: The Under-21 Championship is no longer held.\u00a0\u2022  \u00a0Basketball portalvteInternational men's youth basketballFIBAYouth OlympicsWorld RankingU-17 World CupU-19 World CupU-21 World Cup (defunct)U-16 TBF InternationalU-18 DBB InternationalAfricaU-16U-18U-20 (defunct)AmericasU-16U-18U-20 (defunct)AsiaU-16U-18U-20 (defunct)EuropeU-16U-18U-20 (defunct) OceaniaU-15U-17U-20 (defunct)Note: Under-20/21 tourneys except FIBA Europe's are no longer held.vteInternational women's youth basketballFIBAYouth OlympicsWorld RankingsU21 World ChampionshipU19 World CupU17 World CupAfricaU-20 (defunct)U-18U-16AmericasU-20 (defunct)U-18U-16AsiaU-20 (defunct)U-18U-16EuropeU-20 (defunct) U-18U-16OceaniaU-20 (defunct) U-17U-15Note: Under-20/21 tourneys except FIBA Europe's are no longer held.vteMen's basketball leaguesFIBAFIBA Intercontinental CupNational Basketball AssociationNBA vs. international teamsNBA vs. EuroLeagueAfricaAlgeriaAngola2ndBeninBotswanaBurundiCameroonCentral African RepublicEgyptGuineaIvory CoastKenyaLiberiaLibyaMadagascarMaliMoroccoMozambiqueNigeriaRwanda2ndSenegalSeychellesSouth AfricaBNLNationalTanzaniaTunisiaUgandaZambiaAmericasArgentina2ndBoliviaBrazil2ndCanadaNBA G LeagueNBLCCEBLChileColombiaCubaDominican Republic (Torneo Superior de Baloncesto)EcuadorEl SalvadorMexicoCIBACOPANBA G LeagueNicaraguaPanamaParaguayPeruPuerto RicoUnited StatesNBA G LeagueUruguayVenezuelaAsiaBahrainChinaNBLHong KongIndiaIndonesiaIranIraqJapanJordanKazakhstanKuwaitLebanonMalaysiaMongoliaOmanPhilippinesPBAPBA D-LeagueMPBLNBL\u2013PilipinasPSLQatarSaudi ArabiaSingaporeSouth KoreaSyriaTaiwanP. League+T1 LeagueSBLThailandUnited Arab EmiratesVietnamEuropeAlbania2ndAustria2ndArmeniaAzerbaijanBelarusBelgiumBosnia and Herzegovina2nd \u2013 RSBulgariaCroatia2ndCyprusNorthCzech RepublicDenmarkEstoniaFinland2ndFrance2nd3rdGeorgiaGermany2nd3rdGreat BritainEnglandScotlandGreece2ndHungaryIcelandIrelandIsrael2nd3rdItaly2nd3rdKosovo2ndLatviaLithuania2nd3rdLuxembourgMoldovaMontenegroNetherlandsNorth MacedoniaNorwayPoland2ndPortugal2ndRomaniaRussia2ndSerbia2nd3rd4thSlovakiaSloveniaSpain2nd3rdSweden2nd3rdSwitzerland2ndTurkey2nd3rdUkraine2ndOceaniaAustraliaNew ZealandInternationaltournamentsAfricaBasketball Africa LeagueArab Club Basketball ChampionshipAmericasFIBA Champions League AmericasFIBA South American LeagueAsiaBasketball Champions League AsiaEast Asia Super LeagueWest Asia Super LeagueASEAN LeagueArab Club Basketball ChampionshipAsiaBasketEuropeEuroLeagueEuroCupFIBA Champions LeagueFIBA Europe CupVTB United LeagueAdriatic League2ndAlpe Adria CupBalkan LeagueCaucasus Basketball LeagueEuropean North Basketball LeagueLatvian\u2013Estonian Basketball LeagueLiga UnikeDefuncttournamentsAfricaFIBA Africa Basketball LeagueAmericasFIBA Americas LeaguePan American ChampionshipSouth American ChampionshipTorneo InterLigasArgentinaBrazilChileUnited StatesABACBAUSBLUruguayAsiaABA Club ChampionshipWABA Champions CupJapanbj leagueNBLNBDLJBLTaiwanEuropeSuproLeagueSaporta CupKora\u0107 CupEuroChallengeEuroCup ChallengeBaltic LeagueCentral European LeagueLatin CupNorth European LeagueCzechoslovakiaEnglandRussiaSerbia and Montenegro2ndSpainSoviet UnionTurkeyYugoslavia2nd CategoryvteWomen's basketball leaguesFIBAWomen's World League (defunct)Other leaguesAfricaAlgeriaAngolaBeninBotswanaBurkina FasoBurundiCameroonCape VerdeCentral African RepublicChadDR CongoEgyptGabonGambiaGhanaIvory CoastKenyaLesothoLiberiaLibyaMadagascarMoroccoMozambiqueNamibiaNigeriaSouth AfricaSenegalSeychellesSwazilandTunisiaUgandaZimbabweAmericasArgentinaBrazilCanadaChileColombiaCosta RicaCubaDominicaDominican RepublicEcuadorMexicoParaguayPeruPuerto RicoUnited StatesU.S. Minor: WBDANCAAUruguayVenezuelaAsiaBahrainChinaHong KongIndiaIndonesiaIranIraqJapanJordanKazakhstanKyrgyzstanKuwaitLebanonMalaysiaMongoliaPhilippinesOmanQatarSaudi ArabiaSingaporeSouth KoreaSyriaTaiwanThailandUnited Arab EmiratesEuropeAlbaniaArmeniaAustriaBelarusBelgiumBosnia and HerzegovinaBulgariaCroatiaCyprusNorthCzech RepublicDenmarkEstoniaFinlandFranceGermanyGreat BritainEnglandScotlandGreece2nd divisionHungaryIcelandIrelandIsraelItalyKosovoLatviaLithuaniaLuxembourgMaltaMoldaviaMacedoniaMontenegroNetherlandsNorwayPolandPortugalRomaniaRussiaSerbiaSlovakiaSloveniaSpain2nd divisionSwedenSwitzerlandTurkey2nd divisionUkraineOceaniaAustraliaFijiNew ZealandInternationaltournamentsAfricaAfrican Champions CupArab Club ChampionshipAmericasSouth American ChampionshipsEuropeEuroLeague WomenEuroCup WomenEurope SuperCupAdriatic LeagueBaltic LeagueCentral Europe LeagueEastern European LeagueDefunct leaguesAmericasCentral American ChampionshipsEuropeRonchetti CupVojko Herksel CupMiddle European LeagueAdriatic Friendly LeagueCzechoslovakiaEast GermanySoviet UnionSerbia and MontenegroYugoslaviaUnited Kingdom (old league)vteInternational sports federationsASOIF (30)Summer Olympics FederationsWAqu (aquatic sports)WA (archery)WAth (athletics)BWF (badminton)FIBA (basketball)ICF (canoeing)UCI (cycling)FEI (equestrian)FIE (fencing)FIFA (football)IGF (golf)FIG (gymnastics)IHF (handball)FIH (field hockey)IJF (judo)UIPM (modern pentathlon)WSK (roller sports)FISA (rowing)WR (rugby union)WS (sailing)ISSF (shooting)IFSC (sport climbing)ISA (surfing)ITTF (table tennis)WT (taekwondo)ITF (tennis)WT (triathlon)FIVB (volleyball)IWF (weightlifting)UWW (wrestling)AIOWF (7)Winter Olympics FederationsIBU (biathlon)IBSF (bobsleigh and skeleton)WC (curling)IIHF (ice hockey)FIL (luge)ISU (skating sports)FIS (skiing and snowboarding sports)ARISF (39)Others recognised by IOCFAI (air sports)IFAF (American football)FIA (auto racing)FIB (bandy)WBSC (baseball, softball and Baseball5)FIPV (basque pelota)WCBS (billiards sports)CMSB (boules)IBF (bowling)WBF (bridge)ICU (cheer)FIDE (chess)ICC (cricket)WDSF (dance sport)IFF (floorball)WFDF (flying disc)IFI (ice stock sport)WKF (karate)WAKO (kickboxing)IKF (korfball)FIL (lacrosse)ILSF (life saving)FIM (motorcycle sport)UIAA (mountaineering)IFMA (muaythai)WN (netball)IOF (orienteering)FIP (polo)UIM (powerboating)IRF (racquetball)FIAS (sambo)ISMF (ski mountaineering)WSF (squash)IFS (sumo)TWIF (tug-of-war)CMAS (underwater sports)FISU (university sports)IWWF (waterski and wakeboard)IWUF (wushu)AIMS (20)Others in GAISF / SportAccordIAF (aikido)WAF (arm wrestling)IFBB (bodybuilding)ICSF (casting)WDF (darts)IDBF (dragon boat)FMJD (draughts)IFA (fistball)IGF (go)JJIF (ju-jitsu)FIK (kendo)WMF (minigolf)IPF (powerlifting)IPSC (practical shooting)FISav (savate)ISTAF (sepak takraw)ISFF (sleddog)ISTF (soft tennis)CIPS (sport fishing)FITEQ (teqball)GAISF observer members (11)WDA (dodgeball)FIFG (footgolf)IJRU (jump rope)IUKL (kettlebell lifting)FISO (obstacle)IPF (padel)IFMP (poker)IPSF (pole dance)IRF (rafting)IRL (rugby league)ITSF (table football/soccer)OthersWEKAF (arnis)AFLC (Australian rules football)WBGF (backgammon)ISBHF (ball hockey)IBA (bodyboarding)WB (bowls)IBA1 (boxing)WB2 (boxing)SJJIF (Brazilian jiu-jitsu)IFBA (broomball)WCF (croquet)WDBF (dodgeball)ICFRA (fullbore rifle)IGAA (Gaelic football and hurling)ATSX (downhill ice cross)IKF (kabaddi)IKF (kempo)FISLY (landsailing)IMMAF (mixed martial arts)WMRA (mountain running)ORSI (ocean rowing)IFP (pickleball)IQA (quidditch)IFMAR (radio-controlled racing)IRF (rogaining)WSSF (snowshoe running)ISF (skyrunning)WSSA (sport stacking)ITHF (table hockey)ITPF (tent pegging)FIT (touch football)ITRA (trail running)IAU (ultra running)International Olympic CommitteeInternational World Games AssociationGlobal Association of International Sports Federations1 IOC recognition withdrawn2 Seeking IOC recognitionPortals:\u00a0Basketball\u00a0Sports\u00a0Politics\u00a0SwitzerlandAuthority control databases InternationalISNIVIAFNationalSpainGermanyIsraelUnited StatesSwedenCzech RepublicOtherIdRefRetrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=FIBA&oldid=1222019726\""},{"link": "https://en.wikipedia.org//wiki/Springfield,_Massachusetts", "content": "For the metropolitan area, see Springfield metropolitan area, Massachusetts.City in Massachusetts, United StatesSpringfield, MassachusettsCitySpringfield skylineSymphony HallThe Puritan statue of pioneer Samuel ChapinCourt Square Historic DistrictBasketball Hall of FameHampden County Memorial Bridge overlooking the Connecticut RiverSpringfield Armory National Historic SiteFlagSealCoat of armsNickname(s):\u00a0The City of Firsts; The City of Progress;[1][2][3] The City of Homes; A City in the Forest;[4] Hoop\u00a0City;[5][6]The Western Gateway to New England[7][8]Show SpringfieldShow Hampden CountyShow MassachusettsShow the United StatesCoordinates: 42\u00b006\u203205\u2033N 72\u00b035\u203225\u2033W\ufeff / \ufeff42.10139\u00b0N 72.59028\u00b0W\ufeff / 42.10139; -72.59028CountryUnited StatesStateMassachusettsCountyHampdenRegionNew EnglandHistoric countriesKingdom of EnglandKingdom of Great BritainHistoric coloniesConnecticut Colony (1636\u20131641)Massachusetts Bay Colony (1641\u20131686, 1689\u20131691)Dominion of New England (1686\u20131689)Province of Massachusetts Bay (1691\u20131780)Settled (town)May\u00a014, 1636; 387 years ago\u00a0(1636-05-14)Incorporated (city)May\u00a025, 1852; 171 years ago\u00a0(1852-05-25)Founded byWilliam PynchonNamed forSpringfield, EssexGovernment\u00a0\u2022\u00a0TypeMayor-council city\u00a0\u2022\u00a0MayorDomenic Sarno (D)Area[9]\u00a0\u2022\u00a0City33.08\u00a0sq\u00a0mi (85.68\u00a0km2)\u00a0\u2022\u00a0Land31.87\u00a0sq\u00a0mi (82.54\u00a0km2)\u00a0\u2022\u00a0Water1.21\u00a0sq\u00a0mi (3.14\u00a0km2)Elevation70\u00a0ft (21\u00a0m)Population\u00a0(2020)\u00a0\u2022\u00a0City155,929\u00a0\u2022\u00a0Rank168th, U.S. as of 2020[update] incorporated places estimate\u00a0\u2022\u00a0Density4,892.66/sq\u00a0mi (1,889.08/km2)\u00a0\u2022\u00a0Urban442,145 (US: 92nd)\u00a0\u2022\u00a0Urban\u00a0density2,191.4/sq\u00a0mi (846.1/km2)\u00a0\u2022\u00a0Metro[10]699,162 (US: 87th)Demonym(s)Springfieldian[a]Springfielder[12]Time zoneUTC\u22125 (Eastern)\u00a0\u2022\u00a0Summer (DST)UTC\u22124 (Eastern)ZIP Codes01101, 01103\u201301105, 01107\u201301109, 01118\u201301119, 01128\u201301129, 01151Area code413FIPS code25-67000GNIS feature ID0609092GDPUS$30\u00a0billion[13]Websitewww.springfield-ma.govSpringfield is the most populous city in and the seat of Hampden County, Massachusetts, United States.[14] Springfield sits on the eastern bank of the Connecticut River near its confluence with three rivers: the western Westfield River, the eastern Chicopee River, and the eastern Mill River. At the 2020 census, the city's population was 155,929, making it the 3rd most populous city in the U.S. state of Massachusetts and the 4th most populous city in New England after Boston, Worcester, and Providence. Metropolitan Springfield, as one of two metropolitan areas[b] in Massachusetts (the other being Greater Boston), had a population of 699,162 in 2020.[10]Springfield was founded in 1636, the first Springfield in the New World. In the late 1700s, during the American Revolution, Springfield was designated by George Washington as the site of the Springfield Armory because of its central location.  Subsequently it was the site of Shays' Rebellion. The city would also play a pivotal role in the Civil War, as a stop on the Underground Railroad and home of abolitionist John Brown, widely known for his raid on Harpers Ferry,[15] and for the Armory's manufacture of the famed \"Springfield rifles\" used ubiquitously by Union troops. Closing during the Lyndon B. Johnson administration, today the national park site features the largest collection of historic American firearms in the world.[16]Today the city is the largest in western New England, and the urban, economic, and media capital of Massachusetts' section of the Connecticut River Valley, colloquially known as the Pioneer Valley.Springfield has several nicknames\u2014\"The City of Firsts\", due to the many innovations developed there, such as the first American dictionary, the first American gas-powered automobile, and the first machining lathe for interchangeable parts; \"The City of Homes\", due to its Victorian residential architecture; and \"Hoop City\", as basketball was invented in Springfield in 1891 by Canadian James Naismith.Hartford, the capital of Connecticut, lies 24 miles (39\u00a0km) south of Springfield, on the western bank of the Connecticut River. The Hartford\u2013Springfield region is known as the Knowledge Corridor because it hosts over 160,000 university students and over 32 universities and liberal arts colleges\u2014the second-highest concentration of higher-learning institutions in the United States.[17] The city of Springfield itself is home to Springfield College, Western New England University, American International College, and Springfield Technical Community College, among other higher educational institutions.History[edit]Main article: History of Springfield, MassachusettsPrehistory[edit]The area that would become Springfield was historically inhabited by indigenous people, with documented middle archaic period sites, a ceramic workshop site from the Woodland period in south Springfield, and the contact period Long Hill site, excavated in 1895.[18]At the time of European contact at settlement, the Springfield area was inhabited by the Agawam tribe, who sold land to English settlers..[19]Colonial Period[edit]View of Springfield, Massachusetts, on the Connecticut River c.\u20091840\u20131845, by Thomas ChambersSpringfield was founded in 1636 by English Puritan William Pynchon as \"Agawam Plantation\" under the administration of the Connecticut Colony. In 1641 it was renamed after Pynchon's hometown of Springfield, Essex, England, following incidents, including trade disputes as well as Captain John Mason's hostilities toward native tribes, which precipitated the settlement's joining the Massachusetts Bay Colony.[20][21] During its early existence, Springfield flourished both as an agricultural settlement and as a trading post, although its prosperity waned dramatically during (and after) King Philip's War in 1675, when natives laid siege to it and burned it to the ground. During that attack, three-quarters of the original settlement was burned to the ground, with many of Springfield's residents survived by taking refuge in John Pynchon's brick house, the \"Old Fort\", the first such house to be built in the Connecticut River Valley. Out of the siege, Miles Morgan and his sons were lauded as heroes; as one of the few homesteads to survive the attack, alerting troops in Hadley, as well as Toto, often referred to as the \"Windsor Indian\" who, running 20 miles from Windsor, Connecticut, to the settlement, was able to give advance warning of the attack.[22]The original settlement\u2014today's downtown Springfield\u2014was located atop bluffs at the confluence of four rivers, at the nexus of trade routes to Boston, Albany, New York City, and Montreal, and with some of the northeastern United States' most fertile soil.[23]Post-Colonial Period[edit]In 1777, Springfield's location at numerous crossroads led George Washington and Henry Knox to establish the United States' National Armory at Springfield, which produced the first American musket in 1794, and later the famous Springfield rifle.[24] From 1777 until its closing during the Vietnam War, the Springfield Armory attracted skilled laborers to Springfield, making it the United States' longtime center for precision manufacturing.[25] The near-capture of the armory during Shays' Rebellion of 1787 led directly to the formation of the U.S. Constitutional Convention.Main Street, 1908During the 19th and 20th centuries, Springfielders produced many innovations, including the first American-English dictionary (1805, Merriam-Webster); the first use of interchangeable parts and the assembly line in manufacturing (1819, Thomas Blanchard); the first American horseless car (1825, Thomas Blanchard); the mass production of vulcanized rubber (1844, Charles Goodyear); the first American gasoline-powered car (1893, Duryea Brothers); the first successful motorcycle company (1901, \"Indian\"); one of America's first commercial radio stations (1921, WBZ, broadcast from the Hotel Kimball); and most famously, the world's second-most-popular sport, basketball (1891, Dr. James Naismith).[24] Springfield would play major roles in machine production, initially driven by the arms industry of the Armory, as well as from private companies such as Smith & Wesson, established by Horace Smith and Daniel B. Wesson. Similarly, the industrial economy led Thomas and Charles Wason to establish the Wason Manufacturing Company, which produced the first manufactured sleeping car.[26] The largest railcar works in New England, Wason produced 100 cars a day at its peak; the company was eventually purchased by Brill in 1907 and closed during the Depression in 1937.[27] Among numerous other industries, during the first half of the 20th century Springfield also produced brass goods, chemicals, clothing and knit goods, paper goods, watches, boilers, engines, manufacturing machinery, silverware, jewelry, skates, carriages, buttons, needles, toys, and printed books and magazines.[28]Springfield underwent a protracted decline during the second half of the 20th century, due largely to the decommissioning of the Springfield Armory in 1969; poor city planning decisions, such as the location of the elevated I-91 along the city's Connecticut River front; and overall decline of industry throughout the northeastern United States. During the 1980s and 1990s, Springfield developed a national reputation for crime, political corruption, and cronyism. During the early 21st century, Springfield saw long-term revitalization projects and several large projects, including the $1\u00a0billion New Haven\u2013Hartford\u2013Springfield intercity rail;[29] a $1\u00a0billion MGM casino.,[30][31] and the $95 million redevelopment of Springfield Union Station.[32][33]  In December 2022, Springfield was designated by the National Park Service as an American World War II Heritage City,[34][35] the first in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and one of only 18 communities in the country.[36]Geography[edit]Springfield satellite imageAccording to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of 33.1 square miles (85.7\u00a0km2), of which 31.9 square miles (82.5\u00a0km2) are land and 1.2 square miles (3.1\u00a0km2), or 3.65%, are water.[37] Once nicknamed \"The City in a Forest\", Springfield features over 4.0 square miles (10.4\u00a0km2) of urban parkland, 12% of its total land area.[38]Located in the fertile Connecticut River Valley, surrounded by mountains, bluffs, and rolling hills in all cardinal directions, Springfield sits on the eastern bank of the Connecticut River, near its confluence with two major tributary rivers\u2014the western Westfield River, which flows into the Connecticut opposite Springfield's South End Bridge; and the eastern Chicopee River, which flows into the Connecticut less than 0.5\u00a0mi (0.8\u00a0km) north of Springfield, in the city of Chicopee (which constituted one of Springfield's most populous neighborhoods until it separated and became an independent municipality in 1852).[39] The Connecticut state line is only 4 miles (6\u00a0km) south of Springfield, beside the wealthy suburb of Longmeadow, which itself separated from Springfield in 1783.[39]Springfield's densely urban Metro Center district surrounding Main Street is relatively flat, and follows the north\u2013south trajectory of the Connecticut River; however, as one moves eastward, the city becomes increasingly hilly.Aside from its rivers, Springfield's second most prominent topographical feature is the city's 735-acre (297\u00a0ha) Forest Park. Forest Park lies in the southwestern corner of the city, surrounded by Springfield's attractive garden districts, Forest Park and Forest Park Heights, which feature over 600 Victorian Painted Lady mansions. Forest Park also borders Longmeadow. Springfield shares borders with other suburbs such as East Longmeadow, Wilbraham, Ludlow and the city of Chicopee. The small cities of Agawam and West Springfield lie less than a mile (1.6\u00a0km) from Springfield's Metro Center, across the Connecticut River.The City of Springfield also owns the Springfield Country Club, located in the autonomous city of West Springfield, which separated from Springfield in 1774.[39]Climate[edit] Springfield, MAClimate chart (explanation)JFMAMJJASOND\u00a0\u00a03.2\u00a0\u00a03518\u00a0\u00a02.9\u00a0\u00a03921\u00a0\u00a03.6\u00a0\u00a04828\u00a0\u00a03.7\u00a0\u00a06138\u00a0\u00a04.4\u00a0\u00a07148\u00a0\u00a04.4\u00a0\u00a08057\u00a0\u00a04.2\u00a0\u00a08563\u00a0\u00a03.9\u00a0\u00a08361\u00a0\u00a03.9\u00a0\u00a07553\u00a0\u00a04.4\u00a0\u00a06341\u00a0\u00a03.9\u00a0\u00a05233\u00a0\u00a03.4\u00a0\u00a04023\u2588 Average max. and min. temperatures in \u00b0F\u2588 Precipitation totals in inchesMetric conversionJFMAMJJASOND\u00a0\u00a082\u00a0\u00a01\u22128\u00a0\u00a073\u00a0\u00a04\u22126\u00a0\u00a092\u00a0\u00a09\u22122\u00a0\u00a094\u00a0\u00a0164\u00a0\u00a0110\u00a0\u00a0229\u00a0\u00a0110\u00a0\u00a02614\u00a0\u00a0106\u00a0\u00a02917\u00a0\u00a0100\u00a0\u00a02816\u00a0\u00a099\u00a0\u00a02412\u00a0\u00a0111\u00a0\u00a0175\u00a0\u00a099\u00a0\u00a0111\u00a0\u00a087\u00a0\u00a04\u22125\u2588 Average max. and min. temperatures in \u00b0C\u2588 Precipitation totals in mmSpringfield, like other cities in southern New England, has a hot-summer humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen: Dfa) with four distinct seasons and precipitation evenly distributed throughout the year, but the intensity (and sometimes the duration) of warmer periods is greater than in northern areas. Winters are cold with a daily average in January of around 26\u00a0\u00b0F (\u22123\u00a0\u00b0C). During winter, nor'easter storms can drop significant snowfalls on Springfield and the Connecticut River Valley. Temperatures below 0\u00a0\u00b0F (\u221218\u00a0\u00b0C) can occur each year, though the area does not experience the high snowfall amounts and blustery wind averages of nearby cities such as Worcester, Massachusetts, and Albany, New York.[citation needed]Springfield's summers are very warm and sometimes humid. During summer, several times per month, on hot days afternoon thunderstorms will develop when unstable warm air collides with approaching cold fronts. The daily average in July is around 74\u00a0\u00b0F (23\u00a0\u00b0C). Usually several days during the summer exceed 90\u00a0\u00b0F (32\u00a0\u00b0C), constituting a \"heat wave\". Spring and fall temperatures are usually pleasant, with mild days and crisp, cool nights. Precipitation averages 45.85 inches (1,165\u00a0mm) annually, and snowfall averages 40.5 inches (103\u00a0cm), most of which falls from mid-December to early March. Although not unheard of, extreme weather events like hurricanes and tornadoes occur infrequently in Springfield compared with other areas in the country. On the occasions that hurricanes have hit New England, Springfield's inland, upriver location has caused its damages to be considerably less than shoreline cities like New Haven, Connecticut, and Providence, Rhode Island.[citation needed]On June 1, 2011, Springfield was directly struck by the second-largest tornado ever to hit Massachusetts.[40] With wind speeds exceeding 160\u00a0mph (257\u00a0km/h), the tornado left three dead, hundreds injured, and over 500 homeless in the city alone.[41][42] The tornado caused hundreds of millions of dollars worth of damage to Springfield and wrought significant destruction in a 39-mile-long (63\u00a0km) path from Westfield to Charlton, Massachusetts.[40] It was the first deadly tornado to strike Massachusetts since May 29, 1995.vteClimate data for Bradley International Airport, Connecticut (1991\u20132020 normals,[c] extremes 1905\u2013present)[d]MonthJanFebMarAprMayJunJulAugSepOctNovDecYearRecord high \u00b0F (\u00b0C)72(22)77(25)89(32)96(36)99(37)100(38)103(39)102(39)101(38)91(33)83(28)76(24)103(39)Mean maximum \u00b0F (\u00b0C)57.0(13.9)57.7(14.3)68.2(20.1)82.3(27.9)90.4(32.4)93.2(34.0)95.9(35.5)94.2(34.6)89.6(32.0)80.2(26.8)70.6(21.4)60.1(15.6)97.7(36.5)Mean daily maximum \u00b0F (\u00b0C)35.8(2.1)38.5(3.6)47.3(8.5)60.5(15.8)71.7(22.1)79.9(26.6)85.2(29.6)83.3(28.5)75.7(24.3)63.5(17.5)51.5(10.8)40.6(4.8)61.1(16.2)Daily mean \u00b0F (\u00b0C)27.1(\u22122.7)29.6(\u22121.3)37.8(3.2)49.5(9.7)60.0(15.6)68.9(20.5)74.3(23.5)72.5(22.5)64.8(18.2)53.0(11.7)42.3(5.7)32.6(0.3)51.0(10.6)Mean daily minimum \u00b0F (\u00b0C)18.8(\u22127.3)20.7(\u22126.3)28.2(\u22122.1)38.4(3.6)48.4(9.1)57.8(14.3)63.4(17.4)61.7(16.5)53.8(12.1)42.4(5.8)33.0(0.6)24.6(\u22124.1)40.9(4.9)Mean minimum \u00b0F (\u00b0C)\u22120.9(\u221218.3)1.9(\u221216.7)11.4(\u221211.4)26.3(\u22123.2)34.7(1.5)44.9(7.2)53.0(11.7)50.1(10.1)38.5(3.6)27.7(\u22122.4)17.7(\u22127.9)7.7(\u221213.5)\u22123.4(\u221219.7)Record low \u00b0F (\u00b0C)\u221226(\u221232)\u221224(\u221231)\u22126(\u221221)9(\u221213)28(\u22122)37(3)44(7)36(2)30(\u22121)17(\u22128)1(\u221217)\u221218(\u221228)\u221226(\u221232)Average precipitation inches (mm)3.28(83)3.13(80)3.81(97)3.88(99)3.79(96)4.28(109)4.17(106)4.21(107)4.39(112)4.52(115)3.51(89)4.08(104)47.05(1,195)Average snowfall inches (cm)14.2(36)14.8(38)9.4(24)1.1(2.8)0.0(0.0)0.0(0.0)0.0(0.0)0.0(0.0)0.0(0.0)0.7(1.8)1.4(3.6)10.1(26)51.7(131)Average precipitation days (\u2265 0.01 in)10.910.511.211.512.311.810.710.49.210.59.911.5130.4Average snowy days (\u2265 0.1 in)6.16.23.80.70.00.00.00.00.00.10.94.522.3Average relative humidity (%)63.963.060.458.063.067.368.070.672.969.268.368.066.1Average dew point \u00b0F (\u00b0C)13.6(\u221210.2)15.8(\u22129.0)23.4(\u22124.8)32.4(0.2)45.0(7.2)55.6(13.1)61.0(16.1)60.1(15.6)53.1(11.7)40.8(4.9)31.3(\u22120.4)19.8(\u22126.8)37.7(3.1)Mean monthly sunshine hours169.8176.1213.9228.2258.6273.4293.1269.6223.6199.4139.4139.52,584.6Percent possible sunshine58595857576064636058474958Average ultraviolet index1246788864215Source 1: NOAA (relative humidity, dew point, and sun 1961\u20131990)[44][45][46]Source 2: Weather Atlas (UV)[47]Neighborhoods[edit]Indian OrchardBoston RoadPine PointSixteen AcresForest ParkEast Forest ParkEast SpringfieldBayMcKnightMetroCenterOldHillSixCornersSouthEndUpperHillLiberty HeightsMemorialSquareBrightwood^NNeighborhoods of Springfield, MassachusettsFor a more complete topographical description, see List of Springfield, Massachusetts neighborhoods.Springfield is divided into 17 distinct neighborhoods; in alphabetical order, they are:Bay: features Blunt Park. In terms of demographics, Bay is primarily African American.Boston Road: named for its proximity to the original Boston Post Road system, features the Eastfield Mall. Primarily commercial in character, it comprises several shopping plazas designed for automobile travel.Brightwood: features numerous Baystate Health specialty buildings. Amputated from the rest of Springfield by the Interstate 91 elevated highway, academic suggestions are being made to reunite the neighborhood with the city.[48][49]East Forest Park: Primarily middle class residential in character. Borders East Longmeadow, Massachusetts.East Springfield: features Smith & Wesson and the Performance Food Group. Residential and working-class in character.Forest Park: features 735 acres (3.0\u00a0km2) Forest Park and the Forest Park Heights Historic District, (established 1975).[50] Residential in character, featuring a commercial district at \"The X\" and an upper-class garden district surrounding Forest Park.Indian Orchard: features a well-defined Main Street and historic mill buildings that have become artists' spaces. Formerly a suburb of Springfield, Indian Orchard developed separately as a milltown on the Chicopee River before joining Springfield. Primarily residential in character, Indian Orchard features Lake Lorraine State Park, Hubbard Park, and weekly farmers markets.[51]Liberty Heights: features Springfield's three nationally ranked hospitals: Baystate Health, Mercy Medical, and Shriner's Children's Hospital. Primarily residential and medical in character, it features a demographically diverse population. Liberty Heights includes eclectic districts like Hungry Hill and Atwater Park, and Springfield's 3rd largest park, Van Horn Park.The McKnight Historic District: features the Knowledge Corridor's largest array of historic, Victorian architecture, including over 900 Painted Ladies. Primarily residential in character, McKnight was the United States' first planned residential neighborhood.[24] McKnight's commercial district is called Mason Square. Features American International College. In terms of demographics, McKnight features significant populations of African American and LGBT residents, and is home to Mason Square, named for African American philanthropist Primus P. Mason.Memorial Square: features the North End's commercial district.Metro Center: features nearly all major cultural venues in the region.[52] Commercial, cultural, civic, and increasingly residential in character. Features the Downtown Business District, The Club Quarter\u2014with more than 60 clubs, restaurants, and bars\u2014numerous festivals, cultural institutions, educational institutions, and significant historic sites.North End: not technically a Springfield neighborhood, but rather three northern Springfield neighborhoods. Includes Brightwood, which is residential and medical in character, but cut off from the rest of the city by Interstate 91; Memorial Square, which is commercial in character; and Liberty Heights, which is medical and residential in character. In terms of demographics, the North End is predominantly Puerto Rican.Old Hill: features Springfield College. Residential in character. Bordering Lake Massasoit. Old Hill is primarily Latino.[53]Pine Point: features the headquarters of MassMutual, a Fortune 100 company. Primarily middle-class and residential in character.Six Corners: features Mulberry Street in the Ridgewood Historic District (established 1977);[54] the Lower Maple Historic District (established 1977);[55] and the Maple Hill Historic District, (established 1977).[56] Urban and residential in character.Sixteen Acres: features Western New England University and SABIS International School. Suburban in character. Includes much of Springfield's post-World War II suburban architecture.South End: features numerous Italian\u2013American restaurants, festivals, and landmarks. Urban and commercial in character, this neighborhood was hard hit by the June 1, 2011, tornado. Includes the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame; however, it is separated from it by Interstate 91.Upper Hill: features Wesson Park. Bordering Lake Massasoit. Residential in character. Located between Springfield College and American International College.Demographics[edit]Historical populationYearPop.\u00b1%17652,755\u2014\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a017901,574\u221242.9%18002,312+46.9%18102,767+19.7%18203,914+41.5%18306,784+73.3%184010,985+61.9%185011,766+7.1%186015,199+29.2%187026,703+75.7%188033,340+24.9%189044,179+32.5%190062,059+40.5%191088,926+43.3%1920129,614+45.8%1930149,900+15.7%1940149,554\u22120.2%1950162,399+8.6%1960174,463+7.4%1970163,905\u22126.1%1980152,319\u22127.1%1990156,983+3.1%2000152,082\u22123.1%2010153,060+0.6%2020155,929+1.9%2022*154,064\u22121.2%*= population estimate. Source=1765;[57] 1790-1950;[58] 1960-1980;[59] 1990-2010;[60] 2020;[61] 2022.[62]According to the 2010 Census, Springfield had a population of 153,060, of which 72,573 (47.4%) were male and 80,487 (52.6%) were female. 73.0% of the population were over 18 years old, and 10.9% were over 65 years old; the median age was 32.2 years. The median age for males was 30.2 years and 34.1 years for females.According to the 2010 Census, there were 61,706 housing units in Springfield, of which 56,752 were occupied. This was the highest average of home occupancy among the four distinct Western New England metropolises (the other three being Hartford, New Haven, and Bridgeport, Connecticut). Also as of 2010, Springfield features the highest average homeowner occupancy ratio among the four Western New England metropolises at 50%\u201473,232 Springfielders live in owner-occupied units, versus 74,111 in rental units. By comparison, as of the 2010 Census, New Haven features an owner occupancy rate of 31%; Hartford of 26%; and Bridgeport of 43%.[63]In terms of race and ethnicity, Springfield is 51.8% White, 22.3% Black or African American, 0.6% American Indian and Alaska Native, 2.4% Asian (1.2% Vietnamese, 0.3% Chinese, 0.2% Indian, 0.1% Cambodian, 0.1% Filipino, 0.1% Korean, 0.1% Pakistani, 0.1% Laotian), 0.1% Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander, 18.0% from Some Other Race, and 4.7% from Two or More Races (1.5% White and Black or African American; 1.0% White and Some Other Race). Hispanics and Latinos of any race made up 38.8% of the population (33.2% Puerto Rican, 1.7% Dominican, 1.0% Mexican, 0.5% Guatemalan, 0.3% Cuban, 0.2% Colombian, 0.2% Spanish, 0.2% Salvadoran, 0.1% Peruvian, 0.1% Ecuadorian, 0.1% Panamanian, 0.1% Costa Rican, 0.1% Honduran).[64] Non-Hispanic Whites were 36.7% of the population in 2010,[65] down from 84.1% in 1970.[66]Racial composition2020[67]2010[65]1990[68]1970[68]1940[68]White63.3%51.8%68.5%87%97.9%\u2014Non-Hispanic31.2%36.7%63.6%84.1%[69]\u2212Black or African American20.9%22.3%19.2%3.3%2.1%Hispanic or Latino (of any race)45%38.8%16.9%3.3%[69]\u2212Asian2.7%2.4%1%0.1%\u2212Income[edit]See also: List of Massachusetts locations by per capita incomeData is from the 2009\u20132013 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates.[70][71][72]RankZIP Code (ZCTA)Per capitaincomeMedianhouseholdincomeMedianfamilyincomePopulationNumber ofhouseholdsMassachusetts$35,763$66,866$84,9006,605,0582,530,147101128$33,573$78,864$86,9642,468964United States$28,155$53,046$64,719311,536,594115,610,216201129$26,752$61,435$67,0837,5052,892Hampden County$25,817$49,094$61,474465,144177,990301119$21,261$46,055$58,45813,9624,831401108$18,347$34,064$35,08325,7559,348Springfield$18,133$34,311$39,535153,42855,894501104$17,307$32,273$39,47523,0838,884601103$17,095$14,133$17,4572,5561,553701151$16,169$30,043$28,4159,1343,410801109$13,938$33,376$36,73731,4299,555901107$12,440$21,737$29,19911,2713,9201001105$12,137$18,402$21,34512,3604,836Crime[edit]In 2010, Springfield ranked 35th in the United States' City Crime Rankings\u2014its second-lowest ranking in recent years, (in 2009, it ranked 51st). Springfield's 2010 crime rating of 142 is down approximately 50% from its heights in the late 1990s and 2000s.[73]The Urban Land Institute stated in 2010 that \"the perception of crime [in Springfield] appears to be worse than the reality\".[74]By another measure, crime and population data collected by the FBI, and indexed by NeighborhoodScout showed between 2010 and 2018 the violent crime rate for Springfield decreased by approximately 52.5%, whereas the property crime rate declined by 54%; both rates remain more than twice their respective state averages, as of 2018.[75][76]Economy[edit]Distribution of Greater Springfield NECTA Labor Force (2016)[77]\u00a0\u00a0Nat'l resources & mining (1%)\u00a0\u00a0Construction (5%)\u00a0\u00a0Manufacturing (10%)\u00a0\u00a0Trade, transportation & utilities (18%)\u00a0\u00a0Information (2%)\u00a0\u00a0Finance & real estate (6%)\u00a0\u00a0Professional & business services (8%)\u00a0\u00a0Educational & health services (33%)\u00a0\u00a0Leisure & hospitality (9%)\u00a0\u00a0Other services (4%)\u00a0\u00a0Government (4%)Top Springfield companies for 2018(ranked by revenues)with City and U.S. ranksSource: Fortune 500[78]Spfld.CorporationUSRevenue(in millions)1MassMutual93$33,495.42Eversource Energy364$7,752Top City EmployersSource: MA Executive Office of Labor and Workforce Development[79]RankCompany/Organization1Baystate Medical Center2Smith & Wesson3General Dynamics4MassMutual5Mercy Medical Center6U.S. Postal Service7Big Y Foods8Massachusetts Trial Court9Springfield Republican10Springfield CollegeSpringfield's vicinity to both Boston and New York City lends it a location well suited for distribution, and in the past this has played a significant role in its economy. For this reason in the early 20th century it was the largest producer in New England of commercially produced cakes and pastries, and among the largest in bread\u2014with one 1926 estimate of 1.4 million loaves of bread and 14 million breakfast rolls produced in the city on a weekly basis.[80]Today Springfield's top five industries (in order, by number of workers) are: Education and Health Services; Trade and Transportation; Manufacturing; Tourism and Hospitality; and Professional & Business Services. Springfield is considered to have a \"mature economy\", which protects the city to a degree during recessions and inhibits it somewhat during bubbles.[81] Springfield is considered to have one of America's top emerging multi-cultural markets\u2014the city features a 33% Latino population with buying power that has increased over 295% from 1990 to 2006. As of 2006, more than 60% of Hispanic Springfielders had arrived in the city since 1986.[82][needs update]With 25 universities and colleges within a 15-mile (24\u00a0km) radius from Springfield, including several universities and liberal arts colleges, and more than six institutions within the city itself, the Hartford\u2013Springfield metropolitan area has been dubbed the Knowledge Corridor by regional educators, civic authorities, and businessmen\u2014touting its 32 universities and liberal arts colleges, numerous highly regarded hospitals, and nearly 120,000 students. The Knowledge Corridor universities and colleges provide the region with an educated workforce, which yields a yearly GDP of over $100\u00a0billion\u2014more than at least 16 U.S. States. Hartford\u2013Springfield has become home to a number of biotech firms and high-speed computing centers. As of 2009 Springfield ranks as the 24th most important high-tech center in the United States with approximately 14,000 high-tech jobs.[83]In 2010,[84] the median household income was $35,236. Median income for the family was $51,110. The per capita income was $16,863. About 21.3% of families and 26.8% of the population were below the poverty line, including 40.0% of those under age 18 and 17.5% of those age 65 or over.Business headquarters[edit]Hospital network Baystate Medical Center and gun maker Smith & Wesson are both headquartered in Springfield, and the largest employers in the city; CRRC MA began production in Springfield in 2018, assembling new Orange Line cars, as well as filling rail-car contracts for other US cities, including Los Angeles and Philadelphia.[85]The City of Springfield is the economic center of Western Massachusetts. It features the Pioneer Valley's largest concentration of retail, manufacturing, entertainment, banking, legal, and medical groups. Springfield is home to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts' largest Fortune 100 company, MassMutual Financial Group. It is also home to the world's largest producer of handguns, Smith & Wesson, founded in 1852. It is home to Merriam Webster, the first and most widely read American\u2013English dictionary, founded in 1806.Springfield is also home to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts' third largest employer, Baystate Health, with over 10,000 employees. Baystate is the western campus of Tufts University School of Medicine.[86] Baystate Health is in the midst of a $300\u00a0million addition; nicknamed \"The Hospital of the Future\", it is the largest construction project in New England.[87] In addition to Baystate, Springfield features two other nationally ranked hospitals; Mercy Medical, run by The Sisters of Providence, and Shriners Hospital for Children. The following companies maintain their headquarters in Springfield:The American Hockey League: the primary development league for the NHL.Baystate Health: Largest employer and healthcare provider in Western Massachusetts; 3rd largest employer in Massachusetts, constructing the $300\u00a0million \"Hospital of the Future\".[87]Big Y: a regional supermarket chain that was founded in nearby Chicopee, but is now headquartered in Springfield. Big Y operates more than 50 supermarkets throughout Massachusetts and Connecticut.Breck Shampoo: Founded in Springfield in 1936.Hampden Bank: Founded in Springfield in 1852. Headquartered in Springfield.Health New EnglandMassachusetts Mutual Life Insurance Company: Founded in 1851. MassMutual is the second largest Fortune 100 company based in Massachusetts (2010 list). The corporate headquarters are on State Street.Merriam-Webster: Publisher of the original Webster Dictionary[88]Peter Pan Bus Lines: Headquartered in Metro Center, Peter Pan moved its Springfield terminal and operations to Union Station when renovations were completed in 2017.[89]Smith & Wesson: Founded in 1852, Smith & Wesson is America's largest producer of handguns. The company maintains its corporate headquarters on Roosevelt Avenue in East Springfield.Former companies[edit]With a history spanning nearly four centuries, Springfield has been home to a number of legacy companies that were household names, including:Forbes & Wallace: Regional department store, closed in 1974Friendly Ice Cream Corporation: Founded in Springfield, headquartered in the Springfield suburb of Wilbraham, Massachusetts.Good Housekeeping: Founded in Holyoke in 1885, and published in Springfield from 1887 to 1911 before being moved to New York City with its purchase by the Hearst Corporation.Indian Motocycle Manufacturing Company: America's first motorcycle brand, was founded by George M. Hendee and C. Oscar Hedstr\u00f6m in Springfield in 1901Milton Bradley Company: American game company established in 1860. Headquartered in Springfield until its relocation to suburban East Longmeadow, Massachusetts.Monarch Insurance: Founded in Springfield in 1901, filed for bankruptcy in 1991, soon after completing Springfield's tallest skyscraper, Monarch Place.Rolls-Royce: Rolls-Royce of America Inc. was formed in 1919 to meet the growing U.S. luxury car market. A manufacturing plant was set up on Hendee Street in Springfield, Massachusetts, at the former 'American Wire Wheel Company' building. Over the years, the factory's 1,200 employees produced 1,703 Silver Ghosts and 1,241 Phantoms, with the first Silver Ghost chassis finished in 1921. The 1929 stock market crash led to the plant's closure in 1931. Springfield is the only place outside Britain where Rolls-Royce luxury cars have ever been built.[90]Sheraton Hotels and Resorts: founded in Springfield in 1937 with the purchase of The Stonehaven Hotel, and later the Hotel Kimball.Springfield Armory: Founded by George Washington in 1777; began production of the M1 Garand in 1919, closed by the Pentagon in 1968. The current-day Geneseo, Illinois-based Springfield Armory, Inc. has no presence in Springfield outside licensing the trademark.Wason Manufacturing Company, one founded in 1845, large railway livery manufacturer, first mass-producer of a sleeping car; closed 1932Arts and culture[edit]Cuisine[edit]Springfield's mosaic of ethnic communities have long played a role in its culinary institutions, with many newer smaller restaurants and several decades-old establishments in its downtown.[52] Among its oldest institutions are Smith's Billiards, founded in 1902, which serves Theodore's Blues, Booze, & BBQ, a neighboring barbecue and music venue since 1979, recognized as the \"Best Blues Club in the Country\" in 2004 by the Blues Foundation. Other venues include The Student Prince Cafe, a long-running German restaurant at its downtown location since 1935, featured on Thrillist's 2014 Editor's Choice bars, and a wide array of long-running acclaimed Italian restaurants such as Frigo's (1950), The Red Rose (1963), and Leone's (1988) and pastry shops like La Fiorentina (1947).[91][92]In recent decades the city has also become home to a number of cuisines not found elsewhere in the region, including Cajun restaurant Chef Wayne's Big Mamou,[93] Lebanese restaurant Nadim's Downtown,[94] local chain Puerto Rican Bakery,[95] and a host of other Greek, Jamaican, Mexican, and Vietnamese venues.[96]Festivals[edit]Armory Big Band Concerts: annually each summer the Springfield Armory features 1940s big band concerts.[97]Basketball Hall of Fame Enshrinement Weekend: a week of events culminating in the enshrinement of new members.[98]Bright Nights: Since 1995, over 600,000 lights have illuminated a 2.5-mile (4.0\u00a0km) driving tour of Forest Park every year from Thanksgiving until New Year's Day.[99]Caribbean Festival: held annually in late August, featuring a parade, music, and fashion show.[100]Glendi: a three-day Greek cultural festival hosted by the St. George Greek Orthodox Cathedral every September. The festival, which offers Greek food, pastries, and music, is one of the premier Greek festivals in the region.[101]Hoop City Jazz Festival: an annual event.[102]Mattoon Street Arts Festival.[103]Our Lady of Mount Carmel Society Festival: a mid-July celebration of Italian feast days in Springfield's South End, featuring food and a parade.[104]Parade of Big Balloons: a Thanksgiving parade featuring a 75-foot (23\u00a0m) inflatable \"Cat in the Hat\", large balloons, bands, and marching contingents Springfield's Metro Center.[105]Pioneer Valley Jewish Film Festival: each spring, featuring two weeks of films, guest speakers, and events related to Jewish culture.[106]Springfield Pride: Springfield Pride Week was held in June 2011.[107] The first Pride parade was held in June 2022.[108]Star Spangled Springfield: an Independence Day celebration and fireworks display.[109]Stearns Square Concert Series, and Bike Nights: annually from June through September featuring live music at Stearns Square. Bike Nights coincides with the concerts, and is an event for motorcyclists.[citation needed]World's Largest Pancake Breakfast: annually, near the city's founding date of May 14, Springfield attempts to break the Guinness world record for largest number of pancakes served.[110]Museums[edit]Edo period Japanese armor at the George Walter Vincent Smith Art MuseumSpringfield is home to five distinct museums at the Quadrangle, along with the ornate Springfield City Library\u2014an architecturally significant example of the City Beautiful movement. The Quadrangle's five distinct collections include the Dr. Seuss National Memorial Sculpture Garden; the largest collection of Chinese cloisonne outside of China; and the original casting of Augustus Saint Gaudens's most famous sculpture, Puritan.The Quadrangle's five museums are the Museum of Fine Arts, which features a large Impressionist collection; the George Walter Vincent Smith Art Museum, a collection of Asian curiosities; the Springfield Science Museum, which features a life-size Tyrannosaurus Rex, an aquarium and  the first American-made planetarium, designed and built (1937) by Frank Korkosz; the Amazing World of Dr. Seuss Museum, as Springfield is the birthplace of Theodor Geisel; and the Lyman and Merrie Wood Museum of Springfield History, a museum about the multi-faceted city.[111]The Connecticut Valley Historical Museum was one of the Quadrangle's five museums until 2009.In 2017 the Amazing World of Dr. Seuss Museum opened in the former location, the William Pynchon Memorial Building. The collections of the Connecticut Valley Historical Museum are now located in the Lyman and Merrie Wood Museum of Springfield History.[112][113][114]Springfield's Indian Orchard neighborhood is home to the RMS Titanic Historical Society's Titanic Museum, which displays a collection of rare artifacts that tell stories about the ill-fated ocean liner's passengers and crew.[115]Music[edit]Springfield Symphony OrchestraThe Springfield Symphony Orchestra performs in Springfield Symphony Hall.In 2011, Springfield's music scene was eclectic. It featured a notable heavy rock scene, from which the bands Gaiah, Staind, All That Remains, Shadows Fall, and The Acacia Strain rose to national prominence. Jazz and blues rival rock in popularity.In 2010 and 2011 the Springfield-headquartered Hampden Bank sponsored the Hoops City Jazz & Art Festival, a three-day event that drew approximately 30,000 people to Metro Center to hear varieties of different jazz music\u2014from smooth jazz, to hard bop, to New Orleans-style jazz. Headliners included Springfield great Taj Mahal, the Average White Band, and Poncho Sanchez.Points of interest[edit]Basketball Hall of Fame: housed in a $47\u00a0million structure designed by Gwathmey Siegel & Associates, it is a shrine to the world's second most popular sport, basketball. Located in the city where basketball was invented, the facility\u2014built beside the Connecticut River\u2014spans 80,000 square feet (7,400\u00a0m2) features numerous restaurants and the WMAS-FM studios. However, it is separated from Springfield's Metro Center by an eight-lane highway, Interstate 91.Bright Nights: during the holiday season, Forest Park hosts a lighting display.City Stage: features off-Broadway productions, comedians, and children's programming.Club Quarter: a grouping of 60 clubs, bars, and restaurants around Stearns Square, Worthington and Main Streets. Springfield's variety of nightclubs and entertainment is part of what makes it, according to Yahoo!, one of America's ten best cities for dating.[116] LGBT and dance clubs are integrated with hip-hop, rock, jazz, and blues clubs. Thursday, Friday, and Saturday are particularly busy evenings.Connecticut River Walk Park: a landscaped park that snakes along the Connecticut River, offering views of the Mount Tom Range, Mount Holyoke Range, and Springfield's skyline. However, this park is separated from the city by the eight lane Interstate 91, which cuts through three riverfront neighborhoods and poses accessibility challenges. In 2010, the Urban Land Institute released a plan for Springfield's riverfront, presenting the possibility of moving Interstate 91 or otherwise altering it to allow easier access to the River Walk and the Basketball Hall of Fame.[117][118][119]Court Square: a park, referred to as \"Springfield's front door\", it remains the city's only topographical constant since its founding in 1636. Located on Main Street and surrounded by ornate architecture, including the iconic Springfield Municipal Group, Court Square is the civic heart of Springfield. Until the 1960s, Court Square extended to the Connecticut River; however, as with Forest Park, its connection to the river was severed by the building of the Interstate 91 elevated highway.Dr. Seuss National Memorial Sculpture Garden: amidst the Quadrangle, there are large, bronze statues of characters from Springfield native Dr. Seuss's books.First Game of Basketball Sculpture: located directly on the site of the first game of basketball, this illuminated sculpture in Springfield's Mason Square commercial district has become a site of pilgrimage for basketball fans from around the world.Forest Park: nearly the same size as Central Park at 735 acres (297.4\u00a0ha), it features the Zoo at Forest Park; the 31 acres (12.5\u00a0ha) Porter Lake; numerous playgrounds; a formal rose garden; 38 tennis courts; a skating arena; numerous basketball and bocce courts; lawn bowling fields; Victorian promenades and water gardens; tree groves; baseball diamonds; numerous statues; an aquatic park; and the Barney Carriage House, where many weddings take place. Contrary to popular belief, the park was not designed by Fredrick Law Olmsted.King Philip's Stockade: a historic, city park where in 1675, the Pocumtuc Indians\u2014organized by Chief Metacomet, also known as King Philip\u2014initiated the Attack on Springfield during King Philip's War. During the attack, approximately 75% of the city was burned.MassMutual Center: formerly known as the Springfield Civic Center, this 8,000-seat arena and convention center received a $71\u00a0million renovation in 2003\u20132005. Located across from historic Court Square in Metro Center, the arena houses the American Hockey League's Springfield Thunderbirds. The venue also attracts big-name concert tours. In the past, it has hosted concerts by Nirvana, Pearl Jam, Van Halen, Marilyn Manson, The Eagles, and Bob Dylan, among many others.Mulberry Street: the street featuring the house that inspired Dr. Seuss's first children's book, the classic And to Think That I Saw It on Mulberry Street.The Puritan: a famous statue designed by Augustus Saint-Gaudens depicting Deacon Samuel Chapin, an early settler of Springfield. Originally located in Stearns Square, it has been located in Merrick Park in the Quadrangle for over 100 years and become a symbol of Springfield.The Quadrangle: a campus of five museums surrounding the Dr. Seuss National Memorial Sculpture Garden. It includes the Museum of Fine Arts, known for its Impressionist and Dutch Renaissance collections, as well as its collection of American masters, including works by Springfielder James McNeill Whistler. The Springfield Science Museum features the United States' first planetarium (built 1931), and a large dinosaur exhibit. The George Walter Vincent Smith Museum is known worldwide[citation needed] for housing the largest collection of Chinese cloisonn\u00e9 outside of China; it also features exotic curiosities like Asian suits of armor, and a collection of marble busts. The Quadrangle also features two regional history museums: the Connecticut Valley Historical Society, which tells the story of \"The Great River\" and its people, and the new Museum of Springfield History, which showcases the innovations that make Springfield \"The City of Progress\" during the abolitionist period and Industrial Revolution, which includes the first American\u2013English dictionary, the first gasoline-powered car, the first successful motorcycle company, the first modern fire engine, and dozens of other firsts (see below for a more complete list).St. John's Congregational Church: founded in 1844 as the Sanford Street \"Free Church\", St. John's Congregational Church is a predominately black church that played a pivotal role in the abolitionist movement. While living in Springfield, John Brown attended services here from 1846 to 1850, and as of 2011, the church still displays John Brown's Bible. It was at this church where John Brown met Frederick Douglass, Sojourner Truth, and other prominent abolitionists\u2014and where he later founded the militant League of Gileadites in response to the Fugitive Slave Act. As of 2011, St. John's remains one of the most prominent, predominately black congregations in the Northeastern United States.[120]St. Michael's Cathedral: beside the Quadrangle, this elegant Catholic Church is the seat of the Diocese of Greater Springfield.Stacy Building: the location where, in 1892\u20131893, the Duryea Brothers built the first, American gasoline-powered car, which in 1895 won the first automobile race in Chicago, Illinois. A model of the Duryea Brothers' first car sits in a tree-shaded park beside the historic location, amidst the restaurants and bars of the Club Quarter.Six Flags New England: located 1 mile (1.6\u00a0km) west of Springfield's South End in Agawam, this amusement park is the largest in the Northeast and features a roller coaster, Superman the Ride.The Springfield Armory National Historic Site: founded by General George Washington and Henry Knox in 1777; the site of Shays' Rebellion in 1787, which led directly to the U.S. Constitutional Convention; the site of numerous technological innovations including the manufacturing advances known as interchangeable parts, the assembly line, and mass production; and the producer of the United States Military's firearms from 1794 to 1968, when the Armory was controversially shut down by Defense Secretary Robert McNamara. Today, it is a National Historic Site, and features a museum that includes one of the world's largest collections of firearms.[121]Springfield Cemetery: opened in 1841 and located in the heart of the city, it is designed in the scenic rural cemetery tradition. The cemetery is the final resting place of many pioneer settlers and noted individuals from Springfield and the region.Symphony Hall: dedicated in 1913 by President William Howard Taft as part of the Springfield Municipal Group, Springfield Symphony Hall features \"perfect acoustics\". It is home to the Springfield Symphony Orchestra conducted by showman Kevin Rhodes, and also hosts Broadway touring productions.Stearns Square: designed by the artistic team of Stanford White and Augustus Saint-Gaudens in 1897, this small park is the center of Springfield's Club Quarter.[122] It features ornate architectural and sculptural details from the original team's design; however, most of those were meant to accompany The Puritan, and thus moved to storage. Stearns Square hosts a large motorcycle gathering each Thursday evening, and is the site of a summer concert series.Architecture[edit]See also: List of tallest buildings in Springfield, MassachusettsUnity Church (1869), the first commission of architect H. H. Richardson; demolished  1961.Victorian-era rowhousesMonarch Place (left); Tower Square (right), also known as the MassMutual TowerIn addition to its nickname The City of Firsts, Springfield is known as The City of Homes for its attractive architecture, which differentiates it from most medium-size, Northeastern American cities. Most of Springfield's housing stock consists of Victorian \"Painted Ladies\" (similar to those found in San Francisco); however, Springfield also features Gilded Age mansions, urban condominiums buildings, brick apartment blocks, and more suburban post-World War II architecture (in the Sixteen Acres and Pine Point neighborhoods). While Springfield's architecture is attractive, much of its built-environment stems from the 19th and early 20th centuries when the city experienced a period of \"intense and concentrated prosperity\"\u2014today, its Victorian architecture can be found in various states of rehabilitation and disrepair. As of 2011, Springfield's housing prices are considerably lower than nearby New England cities which do not feature such intricate architecture.In Metro Center, stands the two prominent skyscrapers, Tower Square, and Monarch Place, the latter of which is the tallest building in Massachusetts outside of Boston. Many of the city's Victorian buildings including former hotels, factories, and other institutions have been converted into apartment buildings and luxury condominiums. For example, Springfield's ornate Classical High School (235 State Street), with its immense Victorian atrium\u2014where Dr. Seuss, Timothy Leary, and Taj Mahal all went to high school\u2014is now a luxury condominium building. The Hotel Kimball, (140 Chestnut Street), which hosted several U.S. Presidents as guests and once featured the United States' first commercial radio station (WBZ), has been converted into The Kimball Towers Condominiums.[123] The former McIntosh Shoe Company (158 Chestnut Street), one of Springfield's finest examples of the Chicago School of Architecture, has been converted into industrial-style condominiums; and the red-brick, former Milton Bradley toy factory is now Stockbridge Court Apartments (45 Willow Street). In the Ridgewood Historic District, the 1950s-futurist Mulberry House (101 Mulberry Street), is now a condominium building that features some of the finest views of Springfield.Forest Park (and Forest Park Heights), surrounding by the 735 acres (297.4\u00a0ha) Forest Park, is a New England Garden District featuring more than 600 Victorian Painted Ladies. The McKnight National Historic District, America's first planned residential neighborhood, (1881), features more than 900 Victorian Painted Ladies, many of which have been rehabilitated by Springfield's growing LGBT community. The Old Hill, Upper Hill, and Bay neighborhoods also feature this type of architecture.Maple High, which is architecturally (and geographically) distinct from, but often included with Springfield's economically depressed Six Corners neighborhood, was Springfield's first \"Gold Coast\". Many mansions from the early 19th century and later gilded age stand atop a bluff on Maple Street, overlooking the Connecticut River. The Ridgewood Historic district on Ridgewood and Mulberry Streets also feature historic mansions from the 19th and early 20th centuries.Springfield\u2014like many mid-size Northeastern cities, e.g., Hartford, Albany, and New Haven\u2014from the 1950s to the 1970s, razed a significant number of historic commercial buildings in the name of urban renewal. In 1961, this included Unity Church, the first building designed by the young Henry Hobson Richardson.[124] Springfield's Metro Center remains more aesthetically cohesive than many its peer cities; however, as elsewhere, the city currently features a patchwork of parking lots and grand old buildings. Current efforts are underway to improve the cohesion of Springfield's Metro Center, including the completed Main Street and State Street Corridor improvement projects, the upcoming $70\u00a0million renovation to Springfield's 1926 Union Station and the renovation of the Epiphany Tower on State Street into a new hotel. New constructions include the architecturally award-winning, $57\u00a0million Moshe Safdie-designed Federal Building on State Street.[125]Public library[edit]Further information: Springfield City Library (Massachusetts); Quadrangle (Springfield, Massachusetts) \u00a7\u00a0Springfield City Library; and Indian Orchard Branch LibraryEfforts to establish a public library began in the 1850s.[126][127] In fiscal year 2008, the city of Springfield spent 1.13% ($5,321,151) of its budget on its public library\u2014approximately $35 per person, per year ($46.12 adjusted for inflation to 2022).[128] In fiscal year 2009, Springfield spent about 1% ($5,077,158) of its budget on the library\u2014approximately $32 per person, per year ($42.32 adjusted for inflation to 2022).[129] Springfield has Massachusetts' 2nd largest library circulation, behind Boston.As of 2012, the public library purchases access for its patrons to databases owned by the following companies:[130]EBSCO IndustriesFoundation CenterGale, of Cengage LearningInfobase PublishingLearningExpress, LLCMerriam-Webster, Inc.NewsBank, Inc.Oxford University PressProQuest (products include Massachusetts Newsstand)Sports[edit]The MassMutual Center during a basketball game in 2013; Thunderbirds home game against the Providence BruinsBesides Springfield's historic connection with basketball, the city has a rich sporting history. Volleyball was invented in the adjacent city of Holyoke, and the first exhibition match was held in 1896 at the International YMCA Training School, now known as Springfield College.Ice hockey has been played professionally in Springfield since the 1920s, and Springfield is home to the league headquarters of the American Hockey League. The Springfield Indians of the American Hockey League (now located in Utica, New York) was the oldest minor league hockey franchise in existence. In 1994 the team relocated to Worcester and was replaced by the Springfield Falcons, who played at the MassMutual Center. The Falcons were then replaced by the Springfield Thunderbirds in 2016. For parts of two seasons (1978\u20131980) the NHL Hartford Whalers played in Springfield while their arena was undergoing repairs after a roof collapse. On the amateur level, the Junior A Springfield Olympics played for many years at the Olympia, while American International College's Yellow Jackets compete in NCAA Division I hockey.Basketball remains a popular sport in Springfield's sporting landscape. Springfield is currently home to the Western Mass Zombies a minor league basketball team participating in the East Coast Basketball League. The Zombies in 2021 were named ECBL Mid-Atlantic Champions. Prior to the 2014\u20132015 season, Springfield was home to the Springfield Armor of the NBA Development League, which began play in 2009 at the MassMutual Center. Beginning in the 2011\u20132012 season, the Armor was the exclusive affiliate of the Brooklyn Nets.[131] For many years, the Hall of Fame Tip-Off Classic has been the semi-official start to the college basketball season, and the NCAA Division II championships are usually held in Springfield. The Metro Atlantic Athletic Conference played its championships in Springfield from 2012 to 2014.[132] The New England Blizzard of the ABL played its first game in Springfield, and several minor pro men's and women's teams have called the city home, including the Springfield Fame of the United States Basketball League (the league's inaugural champion in 1985) and the Springfield Hall of Famers of the Eastern Professional Basketball League.Springfield has had professional baseball in the past. The Springfield Giants of the Single- and Double-A Eastern League played between 1957 and 1965. The team was quite successful, winning consecutive championships in 1959, 1960 and 1961, by startling coincidence the same seasons in which the Springfield Indians won three straight Calder Cup championships in hockey. The Giants played at Pynchon Park by the Connecticut River until relocating after the 1965 season. Pynchon Park's grandstands were destroyed by fire the year after in 1966.[133] Before that time, the Springfield Cubs played in the minor league New England League from 1946 until 1949, after which the league folded; they then played in the International League until 1953. For many years before the Giants, Springfield was also a member of the Eastern League, between 1893 and 1943. In general, the team was named the Ponies, but it also carried the nicknames of \"Maroons\" (1895), \"Green Sox\" (1917), \"Hampdens\" (1920\u20131921), \"Rifles (1932, 1942\u20131943) and \"Nationals\" (1939\u20131941). The team located closest are the Valley Blue Sox of the New England Collegiate Baseball League who play their games in nearby Holyoke, but house their team offices at 100 Congress Street in Springfield.Parks and recreation[edit]Barry Mausoleum at Forest Park; the Connecticut River WalkIn 2010, Springfield was cited as the fourth \"Greenest City\" in the United States\u2014the largest city cited in the Top 10. The recognition noted Springfield's numerous parks, the purity of its drinking water, its regional recycling center, and organizations like ReStore Home Improvement Center, which salvages building materials.[134] Springfield features over 2,400 acres (10\u00a0km2) of parkland distributed among 35 urban parks, including the grand, 735 acres (297.4\u00a0ha) Forest Park. Well-known parks include the following, among others:Apremont Triangle Park is a triangular, pocket park in front of Springfield's historic Kimball Towers in Metro Center. Named for Springfield's 104th Infantry Regiment, which following the World War I Battle of Apremont, became the first U.S. military unit awarded for heroism by a foreign power, receiving France's highest military honor: the Croix de Guerre for bravery in combat. The same Springfield unit received the same honor again in World War II. Apremont Triangle Park, steps from both the bohemian Kimball Towers and upper-class Quadrangle-Mattoon Street Historic District offers a place to sit amidst the restaurants on the northern fringe of the Club Quarter.[135]Armoury Commons is a rectangular park just south of the Springfield Armory, located at the corner of Pearl and Spring Streets in Metro Center. Renovated in 2009, Armoury Commons features several sculptures, including Pynchon Park's original sculpture. The park is often used as a place to play chess and other games.Connecticut River Walk Park is a narrow, landscaped park that snakes along the scenic Connecticut River for several miles. Beginning near the Basketball Hall of Fame, it features jogging trails, benches, boat docks, and plazas\u2014all of which afford scenic vistas of the Connecticut River and Connecticut River Valley. However, Interstate 91's position, height, and ancillary structures\u2014including a 1,756-car, below-grade parking lot (the largest in the city), and 20-foot (6\u00a0m) stone walls block all views of the Connecticut River, and all but three passages to the park from Metro Center. Despite Springfield's rating as one of the most walkable cities in the U.S., due to the poor planning of I-91, this park can be difficult to reach on foot.[136]Court Square has been Springfield's one topographical constant since colonial days\u2014it is located in Metro Center. Featuring monuments to Springfield's hero during King Philip's War of 1675, Miles Morgan; President William McKinley; and a Civil War memorial Court Square is surrounded by extraordinarily fine architecture, including H.H. Richardson's Richardsonian Romanesque Courthouse; the Springfield Municipal Group featuring the Greek Revival City Hall, Symphony Hall, and the 300-foot (91\u00a0m) Italianate Campanile; and also the 1819 reconstruction of the 1638 Old First Church. Other buildings included are the One Financial Plaza skyscraper, UMass Amherst's Urban Design Studio in the Byers Block (b. 1835); and, across Main Street, the MassMutual Center arena and convention center.Five Mile Pond is a Naturalist park and pond approximately 5 miles (8\u00a0km) from Springfield's Metro Center in the Pine Point neighborhood of Springfield. There are several, glacial lakes in the Five Mile Pond area, including Lake Lorraine, Loon Pond, and Long Pond. Five Mile Pond is popular with boaters.Forest Park is one of the United States' largest urban parks (at 735 acres (297.4\u00a0ha)) and also one of its most historically important urban parks. Amenities include the Zoo at Forest Park, which features many exotic animals; the United States' first public swimming pool (1899); numerous playgrounds; an ice-skating rink; a formal rose garden; the 31 acres (12.5\u00a0ha) Porter Lake, which features fishing and paddle-boating; 38 tennis courts; numerous basketball and bocce courts; lawn bowling fields; Victorian promenades and water gardens; dozens of hiking and walking trails; an aquatic park; numerous sculptures; and the Carriage House of Springfielder Everett Hosmer Barney, the man who invented the ice skate and popularized the roller skate during the 19th century. During the holiday season, Forest Park hosts the nationally renowned lighting display, Bright Nights. Contrary to popular belief, the park was not designed by Fredrick Law Olmsted.King Philip's Stockade is an historic park, famous as the site where Native Americans organized the 1675 Sack of Springfield; The Stockade features numerous picnic pavilions, excellent views of the Connecticut River Valley, and a sculpture of The Windsor Indian, who tried in vain to warn the residents of Springfield of coming danger.[137]Leonardo da Vinci Park is a small greenspace (0.4 acres), located in the historically Italian South End of Springfield. It features ornamental perimeter fencing surrounding a playground. Leonardo da Vinci Park was renovated in 2009 and now features new picnic tables and playground equipment.Pynchon Park is an architecturally interesting brutalist-style city park, which was dedicated in 1977. It links Springfield's Metro Center with the Quadrangle cultural grouping, (the museums and sculptures sit atop a steep bluff). Mostly made of poured concrete, but featuring a waterfall, lush greenery, and fountains, Pynchon Park received numerous accolades from the American Institute of Architecture for \"enhancing the quality of the urban environment in the core of the city\". It features two levels and a distinctive elevator.[138]Stearns Square is a rectangular park between Worthington Street and Bridge Street in Springfield's Club Quarter, located in Metro Center. Designed by the creative 'dream-team' of Stanford White and Augustus Saint-Gaudens. It was there that St. Gaudens' most famous work, The Puritan, originally stood. The Puritan has since been moved to the Quadrangle, at the corner of State and Chestnut Streets; however, White's and St. Gaudens' original fountain, bench, and turtle sculptures, all meant to complement The Puritan, remain in Stearns Square.Van Horn Park is a large park in the Hungry Hill section of Liberty Heights in Springfield. It features two ponds and a reservoir. The Reservoir and lower dam are not generally accessible to the public. The Main Entrance is on Armory Street near Chapin Terrace.Government[edit]Springfield City Hall (1913)City of Springfield[edit]Springfield employs a strong-mayor form of city government. Springfield's mayor is Domenic J. Sarno, who has been serving since 2008.The city's governmental bureaucracy consists of 33 departments, which administer a wide array of municipal services, e.g. police, fire, public works, parks, public health, housing, economic development, and the Springfield Public School System, New England's 2nd largest public school system.[139]Springfield's legislative body is its City Council, which features a mix of eight ward representatives\u2014even though the city has more than twice that many neighborhoods, resulting in several incongruous \"wards\"\u2014and five at-large city representatives, several of whom have served for well over a decade.Finances[edit]In 2003, the City of Springfield was on the brink of financial default, and thus taken over by a Commonwealth-appointed Finance Control Board until 2009. Disbanded in June of that year, the Control Board made great strides stabilizing Springfield's finances.[140] While Springfield has achieved balanced budgets since 2009, the city has not enlarged its tax base, and thus many of its public works projects\u2014which have been in the pipeline for years, some even decades\u2014remain unfinished (e.g., repairs to Springfield's landmark Campanile).[141] The construction of MGM Springfield, which opened in 2018, fueled a number of projects in the years leading up to and after its opening, with an estimated $3 billion of new development and infrastructure spending materializing.[142]Building off of the work of the Control Board, the city's finances have remained stable under Mayor Domenic J. Sarno's (2008\u2013present) despite the Great Recession and several natural and man made disasters: June 1, 2011, tornado Springfield Tornado, Hurricane Irene, a freak October snow storm (which in some ways was more damaging than the tornado),[143] and a large gas explosion in the downtown area in 2012. The city has recovered, however receiving a bond upgrade from Standard and Poor's Investment Services and the GFOA's Distinguished Budget Award for six consecutive years.Judicial system[edit]Like every other municipality in Massachusetts, Springfield has no judicial branch itself. Rather, it uses the Springfield-based state courts, which include Springfield district court and Hampden County Superior Court, both of which are based in Springfield. The Federal District Court also regularly hears cases in Springfield\u2014now in an architecturally award-winning building on State Street, constructed in 2009.Politics[edit]See also: List of mayors of Springfield, Massachusetts and Mayoral elections in Springfield, MassachusettsVoter Registration and Party Enrollment as of February 1, 2017[144]PartyNumber of VotersPercentageDemocratic53,41651.24%Republican7,9527.63%Unaffiliated41,64339.95%Libertarian1,2301.18%Total104,241100%Springfield became a city on May 25, 1852, by decree of the Massachusetts Legislature, after a decade-long internal dispute that resulted in the partition of Chicopee from Springfield, and thus the loss of two fifths of the city's population.Springfield, like all municipalities in Massachusetts, is subject to limited home rule municipal power. The current city charter, in effect since 1959, uses a \"strong mayor\" government with most power concentrated in the mayor, as in Boston and elsewhere. The mayor representing the city's executive branch presents the budget, appoints commissioners and department heads, and in general runs the city. The mayor is former City Councilor Domenic Sarno, elected November 6, 2007, by a margin of 52.54% to 47.18% against incumbent Charles Ryan. He took office in January 2008. In November 2009 and 2011, Sarno won reelection, albeit\u2014in the latter case\u2014with just 22% of eligible Springfield voters voting.[145]The Springfield City Council, consisting of thirteen members, is the city's legislative branch. Elected every odd numbered year, eight of its members are elected to represent \"wards\", which are made of (sometimes incongruous) groupings of Springfield neighborhoods, e.g. Springfield's ethnic North End neighborhoods\u2014Memorial Square and Brightwood\u2014share a ward with Metro Center, Springfield's downtown. Five city council members are elected at-large. The City Council passes the city's budget, holds hearings, creates departments and commissions, and amends zoning laws.The mayor's office and city council chambers are located in city hall\u2014part of the Municipal Group in Metro Center, Springfield. The Finance Control Board met there as well.Springfield is heavily Democratic. In the 2020 US Presidential Election Democrat Joe Biden received 72.4 percent of the vote to Republican Donald Trump's 25.7 percent.[146]Switch to ward representation[edit]Springfield City Councilors 2024-2025[147][148][149][150]Michael A. Fenton: Ward 2 (President)Melvin Edwards: Ward 3 (Vice President)Sean Curran: At-LargeKateri Walsh: At-LargeJose M. Delgado: At-LargeBrian Santaniello: At-LargeTracye Whitfield: At-LargeMaria Perez: Ward 1Malo Brown: Ward 4Lavar Click-Bruce: Ward 5Victor Davila: Ward 6Tim Allen: Ward 7Zaida Govan: Ward 8In the past, efforts have been made to provide each of the city's eight wards a seat in the city council, instead of the current at-large format. There would still be some at-large seats under this format. The primary argument for this has been that City Councilors live in only four of the city's wards. An initiative to change the composition failed to pass the City Council twice. In 2007 Mayor Charles V. Ryan and City Councilor Jose Tosado proposed a home-rule amendment that would expand the council to thirteen members adding four seats to the existing nine member at large system, but allocated between eight ward and five at large seats. This home-rule petition was adopted by the City Council 8\u20131, and was later passed by the State Senate and House and signed by the Governor. On election day, November 6, 2007, city residents voted overwhelmingly in favor of changing the City Council and School Committee. The ballot initiative that established a new council with five at-large seats and eight ward seats passed 3\u20131. On November 3, 2009, Springfield held its first ward elections in 50 years.State and federal representation[edit]The State Representatives are Orlando Ramos, Carlos Gonz\u00e1lez, Bud Williams, and Angelo Puppolo.  The State Senator is Adam Gomez. Springfield is part of the Eighth Massachusetts Governor's Council district and is represented by Tara Jacobs (D-North Adams).Richard Neal represents United States House of Representatives, Massachusetts District 1, and Elizabeth Warren and Edward Markey represent Springfield in the Federal Senate.Education[edit]Central Branch of Springfield City LibraryGrade schools[edit]The Springfield Plan for citizenship education drew national attention in the 1940s for its efforts to combat racism.Public schools (K\u201312)[edit]Springfield has the second-largest school district in Massachusetts and in New England. It operates 38 elementary schools, six high schools, six middle schools (6\u20138), and seven specialized schools. The main high schools in the city include the High School of Commerce, Springfield Central High School, Roger L Putnam Vocational-Technical High School, and the Springfield High School of Science and Technology, better known as Sci-Tech. There are also two charter secondary schools in the City of Springfield: SABIS International, which ranks among the top 5% of high schools nationally in academic quality, and the Hampden Charter School of Science.The city is required under a 1970s court order to balance schools racially, which had necessitated busing. However, since then, the city and the school's population has shifted and many of the neighborhoods are more integrated, calling into question the need for busing at all.In June 2015, Massachusetts Governor Charlie Baker announced $3.2 million in grants to three underperforming middle schools in Springfield.[151]Private schools[edit]The Roman Catholic Diocese of Springfield operated five Catholic elementary schools in the city, all of which were consolidated into a single entity, St. Michael's Academy, in the autumn of 2009.[152] The non-denominational Pioneer Valley Christian Academy is located in the suburban Sixteen Acres neighborhood, educating K\u201312.[153] Non-sectarian elementary schools within the City of Springfield include the Pioneer Valley Montessori School in Springfield's Sixteen Acres neighborhood and Orchard Children's Corner in suburban Indian Orchard, a Pre-Kindergarten, among others.The diocese runs Pope Francis Preparatory School (previously Cathedral High School), which is the largest Catholic high school in Western Massachusetts. Two nonsectarian private schools are also located in Springfield: Commonwealth Academy[154] located on the former campus of the MacDuffie School (which moved to Granby, Massachusetts, in 2011 after 130 years in Springfield), and teaches grades four through twelve, soon to enroll students in grades K\u201312; and the Academy Hill School,[155] which teaches kindergarten through grade eight.Within 15 miles (24\u00a0km) of Springfield are many private prep schools, which can serve as day schools for Springfield students; they include the Williston Northampton School in Easthampton, Massachusetts; Wilbraham & Monson Academy in Wilbraham, Massachusetts; and Suffield Academy in Suffield, Connecticut.Higher education[edit]Universities and colleges[edit]The Knowledge Corridor boasts the second-largest concentration of higher learning institutions in the United States, with 32 universities and liberal arts colleges and over 160,000 university students in Greater Hartford\u2013Springfield. This includes two college consortia, the Five Colleges, and the Cooperating Colleges of Greater Springfield, whose member institutions often collaborate in greater outreach programs. Within 16 miles (26\u00a0km) of Springfield's Metro Center, there are 18 universities and liberal arts colleges, which enroll approximately 100,000 students.[156]As of 2015, Springfield attracts over 20,000 university students per year. Its universities and colleges include Western New England University; Springfield College, famous as the birthplace of the sport of basketball (1891) and the nation's first physical education class, (1912); American International College, founded to educate America's immigrant population, is notable as the inventor of the Model Congress program. UMass Amherst relocated its urban design center graduate program to Court Square in Metro Center.[157]Several of Greater Springfield's institutions rank among the most prestigious in the world. For example, Amherst College, 15 miles (24\u00a0km) north of Springfield, and Smith College, 13 miles (21\u00a0km) north of Springfield, consistently rank among America's top 10 liberal arts colleges. Mount Holyoke College\u2014the United States' first women's college\u2014consistently ranks among America's Top 15 colleges, and it is located only 9 miles (14\u00a0km) north of Springfield. Hampshire College is located 14 miles (23\u00a0km) north of Springfield. The 30,000-student University of Massachusetts Amherst is located 16 miles (26\u00a0km) north of Springfield. Approximately 10 miles (16\u00a0km) west of Springfield, across the Memorial Bridge in Westfield, is Westfield State University, founded by noted education reformer Horace Mann. Westfield was the first university in America to admit students without regard to sex, race, or economic status.[158]Just outside Springfield's northern city limits is Elms College, a Catholic college. Likewise, just 2 miles (3.2\u00a0km) below Springfield's southern city limit in Longmeadow is Bay Path University; both schools were once all-women but are now co-ed.Community colleges[edit]In 1968, following the Pentagon's controversial closing of the Springfield Armory, Springfielders founded Springfield Technical Community College on 35 acres (14.2\u00a0ha) behind the Springfield Armory National Park. Springfield Technical Community College is the only polytechnic community college in Massachusetts, and was founded to continue Springfield's tradition of technical innovation.[159]Holyoke Community College, 8 miles (13\u00a0km) north of Springfield, offers more traditional community college programming in Greater Springfield, as well as instruction in the culinary arts.Media[edit]Headquarters and printing facilities of The RepublicanNewspapers[edit]Springfield's largest local newspaper is The Republican, which has also previously been known as the Springfield Union-News & Sunday Republican, from when it merged with the Springfield Union. Smaller papers such as The Reminder[160] and the Valley Advocate also serve Greater Springfield.Other newspapers serve specific communities of interest, such as El Pueblo Latino and El Sol Latino, which serve the Hispanic community, as well as Unity First and the AfAm Point of View,[161] both of which serve the African-American community, and The Rainbow Times, which serves Springfield's LGBT community.Television[edit]Springfield has a long history of broadcast television, including two of the oldest UHF television stations on the air today.Channel (digital/virtual)Call signNetworkOwner11/22WWLPNBC/CW (through The CW Plus) (DT2)Ion Television (DT3)Nexstar Media Group21/3.5WSHM-LDCBSGray Television13/57WGBYPBSWGBH Educational FoundationOperated by New England Public Media21/22WFXQ-CDNBC++Nexstar Media Group34WTXX-LDIndependentTyche Broadcasting40WGGBABC, FOX/MyNetworkTV (DT2)Gray Television43WHTX-LPUnivisionEntravision Communications++WFXQ-CD rebroadcasts WWLP.WWLP-TV 22 WWLP-TV is the NBC affiliate for the area, and also carries subchannel affiliations with The CW and Ion Television. WWLP-TV is owned and operated by the Nexstar Media Group, and maintains studios in nearby Chicopee (where the station moved from their old studios atop Provin Mountain). WWLP is the oldest TV station to air regularly scheduled programming in the market, launching its schedule on March 17, 1953, on Channel 61. WWLP also operated WRLP (UHF 32), a UHF station licensed to Greenfield, whose transmitter was in Winchester, New Hampshire, as well as W69AQ (UHF 69), a low power station that transmitted from the WWLP tower on Provin Mountain.WGGB 40 WGGB is the ABC and primary Fox, secondary MyNetworkTV affiliate for the area. WGGB is owned and operated by Gray Television and its studios are on Liberty Street near the Chicopee line. WGGB (originally WHYN) signed on on April 1, 1953, on Channel 55. In 1958, WHYN switched to UHF 40. Guy Gannett Broadcasting bought the station in 1979 and changed its call sign to the current WGGB-TV effective at the start of the following year. In 2008, WGGB launched a secondary service called \"Fox 6\", named after its channel position on the local Comcast cable TV lineup. FOX6 also appears on WGGB's DTV sub-channel 40.2. WGGB's analog television signal signed off permanently in late November 2008, due to a transmitter failure. WGGB and WSHM-LD broadcast local news under the branding \"Western Mass News\", and maintain a relationship with the Springfield Republican.WSHM-LD 3 WSHM-LD is Springfield's CBS affiliate operated by Hartford's WFSB. WSHM is owned and operated by Gray Television and shares studios with WGGB on Liberty Street near the Chicopee line. WSHM-LD and WGGB broadcast local news under the branding \"Western Mass News\", and maintain a relationship with the Springfield Republican. WSHM-LD was formerly W67DF, a translator of TBN, before being sold to the Meredith Corporation, WFSB's then-owners. WSHM-LD is referred to as \"CBS 3\", denoting its cable channel assignment within the market and to encourage long-time viewers of WFSB to stay with WSHM-LD.WGBY 57 WGBY is the PBS member station for the area. WGBY's studios are in downtown Springfield, near Interstate 91 and the Conrail train lines. WGBY signed on in 1963. WGBY is owned by the Boston-based WGBH Educational Foundation and is operated by New England Public Media. WGBY signed off their analog signal permanently in November 2008, to allow for the replacement of transmission antennas.Cable operators[edit]Springfield proper is serviced exclusively by Comcast cable. Springfield was formerly wired with a \"dual plant\" cable system from 1980 until 2001, requiring an A/B switch for each home to watch programming and complicating VCR recordings.Radio[edit]Springfield was home to the first commercially licensed radio station in the United States, and the oldest radio station of any kind in New England: WBZ, which broadcast live from Springfield's luxurious Hotel Kimball at 140 Chestnut Street (now the Kimball Towers Condominiums) before moving to Boston in 1931.[162]CallsignFrequencyCity/townNetwork affiliation / ownerFormatWFCR88.5 FMSpringfield[163]University of Massachusetts AmherstPublic RadioWSKB89.5 FMWestfieldWestfield State UniversityCollege RadioWSCB89.9 FMSpringfieldSpringfield CollegeCollege RadioWTCC90.7 FMSpringfieldSpringfield Technical Community CollegePublic RadioWAIC91.9 FMSpringfieldAmerican International CollegeCollege RadioWHYN-FM93.1 FMSpringfieldiHeartMediaHot Adult Contemporary (Top 40 on HD2)WMAS-FM94.7 FMEnfield, ConnecticutEntercomAdult contemporary (Country on HD2)WLZX-FM99.3 FMNorthamptonSaga Communications of New England\"Everything That Rocks\"WLCQ-LP99.7 FMFeeding HillsLighthouse Christian CenterChristian Rock/Pop Music, \"The Q\"WRNX100.9 FMAmherstiHeartMediaCountryWAQY102.1 FMSpringfieldSaga Communications of New EnglandClassic rockWCCH103.5 FMHolyokeHolyoke Community CollegeCollege RadioWNEK-FM105.1 FMSpringfieldWestern New England UniversityCollege RadioWWEI105.5 FMEasthampton/SpringfieldEntercomSports Talk (simulcast of WEEI-FM in Boston)WEIB106.3 FMNorthampton/SpringfieldCutting Edge BroadcastingSmooth JazzWHYN560\u00a0AMSpringfieldiHeartMediaNews/TalkWNNZ640\u00a0AMWestfieldUniversity of Massachusetts AmherstPublic Radio (programmed by WFCR)WACE730\u00a0AMChicopeeCarter Broadcasting CorporationReligiousWARE1250\u00a0AMWareSuccess Signal BroadcastingOldiesWACM1270\u00a0AMSpringfieldDavidson Media GroupSpanishWHLL1450\u00a0AMSpringfieldEntercomSports Radio (CBS Sports Radio affiliate)WSPR1490\u00a0AMSpringfieldDavidson Media GroupSpanishInfrastructure[edit]Transportation[edit]Union Station is used for bus, Amtrak, and commuter rail serviceSpringfield is called the Crossroads of New England because it is the major shipping nexus from New York City, Boston, Montreal and the Great Lakes (via Albany, New York). Much of the cargo heading from one of these places to another crosses through the City of Springfield.[citation needed] As a geographical trade center, Springfield has more advantages than just being equidistant to these other large trade centers\u2014it sits beside the Connecticut River, is located near some of the most fertile farmland in the Northeast, and is served by numerous rail lines and Interstate Highways, including I-90 (Mass Pike) and I-91, which connect New Haven, Hartford, Holyoke, Northampton, and Vermont to Springfield. One of the few spurs of I-91 in Massachusetts, I-291, runs through Springfield, and provides a secondary connection between I-90 and I-91.Rail[edit]Springfield Union Station, originally opened in 1926 and re-opened in 2017, is served by five Amtrak intercity routes: the Vermonter, which runs from Washington, D.C. to St. Albans, Vermont; the Lake Shore Limited, which runs from Chicago to Boston; the Hartford Line, which runs from Springfield to New Haven; the Valley Flyer, which runs from New Haven to Greenfield; and the Northeast Regional, which runs from Springfield to D.C./Virginia. Amtrak relocated its operations into Union Station proper from their previous track side station building in June 2019. A high level train platform is under construction to improve the experience for rail passengers and is scheduled to be completed before the end of 2019.CTRail's Hartford Line started operating from Union Station in June 2018, with Springfield as the northern terminus. Trains operate to New Haven, CT with multiple stops in Connecticut along the way. The line shares the same route and station listing as the Amtrak route of the same name, and the two are operated in conjunction as a commuter rail service for the region.The New Haven\u2013Springfield Line was upgraded in conjunction with the launch of the Hartford Line service. The project received funding from the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, the Federal Government, and the State of Connecticut. Amtrak trains on the route between New Haven and Springfield reach speeds of 110\u00a0mph (177\u00a0km/h).In 2011, Springfield Union Station started a $70\u00a0million renovation to become an intermodal transportation facility, allowing Peter Pan Bus, Greyhound Bus, and the PVTA to occupy a modern space next to the renovated Union Station.[164] It was completed in June 2017.There are no major freight yards in Springfield proper, but Connecticut Southern Railroad and CSX serve CSX's West Springfield yard across the Connecticut River.Bus[edit]The Pioneer Valley Transit Authority (PVTA) is based in Springfield and uses Union Station as its Springfield hub, next to the Gothic arch that denotes the entrance to downtown Springfield. The PVTA operates nineteen bus routes from Union Station. The PVTA's Springfield service area includes Springfield, Holyoke, Chicopee, Westfield, West Springfield, Ludlow, Agawam, and East Longmeadow. With transfers, it is possible to travel into PVTA's northern service area, which includes Northampton, Amherst, and Easthampton.Intercity bus service is provided by Peter Pan Bus Lines and Greyhound Lines, both of which operate from Union Station. They provide service to destinations across the northeast United States.Air[edit]Springfield is primarily served by Bradley International Airport, in Windsor Locks, Connecticut, 12 miles (19\u00a0km) south of downtown. It features over 100 daily departures to 30 destinations on nine airlines.[165] It is also the primary airport for Hartford.Other regional airports serving Springfield include:Westfield-Barnes Regional Airport is 12 miles (19\u00a0km) from downtown Springfield in Westfield, Massachusetts. It is 1.5 miles (2.4\u00a0km) from the Massachusetts Turnpike.Westover Metropolitan Airport is 5 miles (8\u00a0km) from downtown Springfield. It is 3 miles (5\u00a0km) from the Massachusetts Turnpike.Logan International Airport in Boston is approximately 80 miles (130\u00a0km) northeast of Springfield.Cycling and walking[edit]Taken in its entirety, Springfield has a moderate Walk Score of 59,[166] however walkability varies between neighborhoods. Whereas the suburban neighborhood of Sixteen Acres is largely car-dependent with a score of 30, and Indian Orchard has a somewhat walkable rating of 54, the Metro Center area, with its grid central to stores, residences, and businesses, yields a Walk Score of 82.[167][168][169]The city's Connecticut River Walk Park offers a largely uninterrupted bike route from the North to South End, and is part of a broader plan by the Pioneer Valley Planning Commission to create a continuous route alongside the Connecticut River from Agawam to Holyoke, with construction and planning ongoing.[170]The city recently partnered with Bewegen[171] (an e-bike share system provider) to install e-bike share stations in both Springfield[172] and West Springfield.[173]Water and sewer system[edit]The Springfield Water and Sewer Commission (created in its current form in 1996) owns several reservoirs and aqueducts, as well as hydropower and sewage treatment stations. The city purchased the Springfield Aqueduct Company in 1872.[174]Borden Brook Reservoir, located in the rural western Hampden County town of Blandford was completed in 1910. It feeds into the Cobble Mountain Reservoir (completed in 1931) located at the junction of the towns of Blandford, Granville and Russell. The Wild Cat Aqueduct carries water from the Cobble Mountain Reservoir to a hydroelectric generating station on the Granville\u2013Russell border, at the Little River. Drinking water flows to the West Parish Water Filtration Plant in Westfield, and is then pumped to holding tanks at the top of Provin Mountain in Agawam.[175]The 1875 Ludlow Reservoir, also known as Springfield Reservoir, is maintained as an emergency water supply; it is located in Ludlow and fed via the Broad Brook Canal.SWSC provides retail water in Springfield and Ludlow; wholesale water to Agawam, East Longmeadow, and Longmeadow; partial or peak service to Southwick, Westfield, and West Springfield; and emergency service to Chicopee and Wilbraham.[175]Emergency services[edit]The Springfield Fire Department provides fire protection and emergency medical services to the city, and is one of the oldest fire departments in the United States.[176]Notable people[edit]Creighton Abrams, U.S. Army general, Chief of Staff of the United States Army, and Commander of Operations during the Vietnam WarWeston Adams, longtime president of the NHL's Boston BruinsJohnny Appleseed, American folk hero, spent his childhood and young adulthood in SpringfieldJoe Arpaio, \"America's Toughest Sheriff\", known for \"tent city\" prison in Maricopa County, ArizonaAdele Addison, soprano, acclaimed in classical music during the 1950s\u20131960sJoel Asaph Allen, zoologistGeorge Ashmun, founder of the U.S. Republican Party and Springfield lawyerTravis Best, National Basketball Association playerAlfred Ely Beach, inventor of New York City's subway systemMary Agnes Dalrymple Bishop (1857\u20131934), American journalist, newspaper editorR. P. Blackmur, poet and literary criticNina Blackwood, original MTV VJ and Sirius Satellite Radio DJRan Blake, jazz pianistThomas Blanchard, inventor of lathe (1819), which led to technological advances known as interchangeable parts and assembly line manufacturing; also, inventor of first modern car\u2014powered by steam (1825)Herbert Blomstedt, orchestra conductor of Danish National Symphony Orchestra, and symphony orchestras in San Francisco and Stockholm, SwedenEdward Boland, U.S. Congressman 1952\u20131989Cheryl Boone Isaacs, first African-American and third woman to become President of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and SciencesMary Ann Booth, American photomicroscopy pioneer, parasitologist, whose work on the bubonic plague and many other diseases was internationally regardedChester Bowles, former Governor of ConnecticutSamuel Bowles, journalist, founder of Springfield Republican, one of founders of United States Republican PartyLloyd Wheaton Bowers, lawyer and former U.S. Solicitor GeneralRon Brace, National Football League playerMilton Bradley, inventor of parlor games and game-manufacturerChuck Bresnahan, NFL coachJohn Brown, abolitionistHarold R. Bull, completed the weather report that enabled the D-Day launch during World War IINick Buoniconti, NFL Hall of FamerThornton Burgess, children's author, known for \"Peter Cottontail\"Chris Capuano, Major League Baseball pitcherRuth E. Carter, Oscar-winning costume designer for her work on Marvel's Black PantherAthan Catjakis (1931\u20132022), Massachusetts state legislatorJohn Cena, WWE wrestlerAmzi Chapin, cabinet maker, singing-school teacher and shapenote composerChester W. Chapin, railroad magnateDeacon Samuel Chapin, early settler of Springfield, 1642John A. Chapman (1965\u20132002), USAF Combat Controller, posthumously awarded the Medal of HonorThornton Chase, first American convert to the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed FaithYodelin' Slim Clark, singerBobby Coleman, singer-songwriterGeorge R. Collins, art historianShamus Culhane, lead animator at Walt Disney Studios, who produced such classics as Snow White and the Seven DwarfsBilly Curtis, actor, best known as a Munchkin in \"The Wizard of Oz\", and \"Terror of Tinytown\"Bill Danoff, member of Starland Vocal Band and wrote No. 1 hit \"Afternoon Delight\"Donald Davidson, philosopher, known for studies regarding communicationJim Douglas, Governor of Vermont from 2003 to 2010Vinny Del Negro, NBA player and head coachMax Ehrlich, writer, best known for his novel The Reincarnation of Peter Proud, and its film adaptation set in SpringfieldDavid W. Evans, professor of psychology and neuroscience, Bucknell UniversityGeorge Bowman Ferry, architectTheodore Foley, Roman Catholic priest, nominated for sainthood in 2008June Foray, voice actress for animated filmsBertram Forer, psychologist, known for the Forer effectCarole Fredericks, French musician whose brother was Springfield blues great Taj MahalJohn Garand, weapons inventorTheodor Seuss Geisel (a.k.a. Dr. Seuss), writer and illustrator best known for his children's booksFrederick H. Gillett, Speaker of the United States House of Representatives from 1919 to 1925, United States Senator from 1925 to 1931Charles Goodyear, inventor of vulcanized rubberMike Gravel, senator from AlaskaChester Harding, portrait painter during the 19th centuryRichard F. Heck, awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 2010Victor Heflin, football playerIris Holland, Massachusetts state legislatorElizur Holyoke, early explorer of Western Massachusetts, for whom Holyoke, Massachusetts, and the Holyoke Range are namedJoseph French Johnson, economist, wrote the inspirational \"The Price of Success\"Sophia Orne Johnson (1826\u20131899), authorRaymond A. Jordan (1943\u20132022), state legislatorAlan Kay, computer scientistEdward Kamuda, founder and president of Titanic Historical SocietyDerek Kellogg, LIU Brooklyn men's basketball head coachPeter King, sportswriter and TV commentatorStanley King, 11th president of Amherst CollegeBob Kudelski, professional hockey playerPaul LaPalme, Major League Baseball pitcherTimothy Leary, writer, psychologist and advocate of psychedelic drug research and useNorman Leyden, conductor and clarinetistEdward Tsang Lu, astronautArthur MacArthur, Jr., Army general, father of Douglas MacArthurWilliam Manchester, historian, author of The Death of a President and other renowned literary worksRabbit Maranville, professional baseball player, inducted into Baseball Hall of Fame in 1954Frank J. Matrango, state legislatorTim Mayotte, professional tennis playerPatrick Mazeika (born 1993), baseball playerLinda J. Melconian, public servant, educator, lawyerMiles Morgan, hero of King Philip's War of 1675, a statue of Morgan stands in Springfield's Court SquareHorace A. Moses, philanthropist and paper pioneerJames Naismith, inventor of basketballTom Newberry, football playerLowell North, Olympic gold medalist in sailingLarry O'Brien, Postmaster General, Democratic National Committee chairman and Commissioner of the National Basketball AssociationJerry Orbach, ActorRobert B. Parker, author of Spenser and Jesse Stone novelsJoe Philbin, head coach of NFL Miami DolphinsMaude Gillette Phillips (1860\u2013?), author, educatorNella Brown Pond (1858\u20131893), dramatic readerEleanor Powell, actress and tap dancerWilliam Pynchon, founder of City of Springfield; earlier founded Roxbury, Massachusetts; in 1649, wrote America's first banned bookJoe Ragland (born 1989), American-Liberian basketball player for Hapoel Eilat of the Israeli Basketball Premier LeagueCaleb Rice, first Mayor of Springfield, President of MassMutualGeorge Washington Rice, founder of MassMutual Life InsuranceWilliam Rice, Methodist minister, President and Executive Director of the Springfield City Library AssociationWilliam Marsh Rice, founder of Rice University, Houston, Texas[177]Stephen Rivers (1955\u20132010), political activist and publicist.[178]Peter Robinson, actor and freak show performerKurt Russell, actorJulia Sanderson, actress, vaudevillian, and namesake of Springfield's Julia Sanderson Theater (now The Paramount Theater)Joe Scibelli, Los Angeles Rams professional football playerMike Scully, writer and producer for The SimpsonsChlo\u00eb Sevigny, actressMichael Shapiro, actor and voice actorDaniel Shays, leader of Shays' RebellionJohn Shea, actor and directorEddie Shore, professional hockey player and ownerStass Shpanin, contemporary visual artist included in Guinness Book of World Records as Youngest Professional Artist in the WorldDavid Socha international soccer refereeTalbert W. Swan II: Prelate, Church Of God In Christ, Activist, AuthorTommy Tallarico, video game music composerAntonio Thomas, professional wrestlerLouise Hall Tharp, biographerGeorge Tomasini, film editor known for work with Alfred HitchcockMike Trombley, former Major League Baseball pitcherPaige Turco, actressFrank Vatrano, ice hockey playerLynn Vincent, authorBenjamin Wade U.S. Senator from OhioDavid Ames Wells, engineer and economistDaniel Baird Wesson, weapons inventor and founder of Smith & WessonMaura West, Daytime Emmy award-winning soap opera actressJames McNeill Whistler, painterMary Margaret O'Reilly, civil servantTerence H. Winkless, film and television directorNotable musical artists[edit]The Acacia Strain, deathcore bandAgoraphobic Nosebleed, grindcore bandAll That Remains, metalcore bandDestrophy, Otep, Erik Tisinger, guitarist and bassist, from SpringfieldKillswitch Engage, metalcore bandLucy Escott, soprano[179][180]Eddie Fontaine, singerCarole Fredericks, singerAshley Gearing, country music artistTaj Mahal, blues musicianTony MacAlpine, fusion musicianJoe Morello, jazz drummer with the Dave Brubeck QuartetMark Mulcahy musicianLinda Perry, songwriter, formerly of 4 Non BlondesShadows Fall, metalcore bandSigns, reggaeton bandStaind, alternative rock bandPaul Weston, composer for Bing Crosby, Frank Sinatra, and othersWanita \"D. Woods\" Woodgette, hip hop artistD. Woods, member of group Danity KanePhil Woods, jazz saxophonist with Quincy Jones, Steely Dan, Paul Simon, othersSister cities[edit]Bracigliano, Salerno, Italy[181]Takikawa, Hokkaido, Japan[182]Tralee, County Kerry, Ireland[183]See also[edit]The Children's Study HomeNational Register of Historic Places listings in Springfield, MassachusettsEquivalent LandsUSS Springfield, 4 shipsNotes[edit]^ While both demonyms are listed in the Merriam-Webster Dictionary, there is some indication that Springfieldian is given some propriety:\"In at least two cases, the name of the resident depends on which state the town is in: Richmonder in Virginia but Richmondite in Indiana; Springfieldian in Massachusetts but Springfielder in Ohio.\"[11]^ Combined statistical areas (CSAs) as defined by the US Census.^ Mean monthly maxima and minima (i.e. the expected highest and lowest temperature readings at any point during the year or given month) calculated based on data at said location from 1991 to 2020.^ Official records for Hartford kept at downtown from January 1905 to December 1948, Brainard Airport from January 1949 to December 1954, and at Bradley Int'l in Windsor Locks since January 1955.[43]References[edit]^ \"The City of Progress New City Library, Merrick Park, State Street Springfield, MA\". Cardcow.com. Archived from the original on October 7, 2012. Retrieved July 16, 2011.^ \"The City Of Progress, Winchester Square Springfield, MA\". Cardcow.com. Archived from the original on October 7, 2012. Retrieved July 16, 2011.^ Denis Larionov & Alexander Zhulin. \"Progressive Springfield, Massachusetts, by George Storrs Graves\". Ebooksread.com. Archived from the original on October 12, 2012. Retrieved July 16, 2011.^ \"Picturesque Springfield and West Springfield, Massachusetts\". Internet Archive. Retrieved December 27, 2011.^ \"Progressive Springfield, Massachusetts\". Internet Archive. Retrieved December 27, 2011.^ \"Picturesque Springfield and West Springfield, Massachusetts\". Internet Archive. Retrieved December 27, 2011.^ The Price & Lee Co.'s Springfield Directory. Price & Lee Co. 1960. p.\u00a022. Retrieved March 15, 2017.^ Industrial Directory and Shippers' Guide. New York Central Lines. 1921. p.\u00a0266. Archived from the original on February 15, 2023. Retrieved March 15, 2017.^ \"2020 U.S. Gazetteer Files\". United States Census Bureau. Archived from the original on May 28, 2022. Retrieved May 21, 2022.^ a b \"Geographic Identifiers: 2010 Census Summary File 1 (G001): Springfield, MA Metro Area\". American Factfinder. U.S. Census Bureau. Archived from the original on February 13, 2020. Retrieved August 2, 2017.^ Brooke, Maxey (1983). \"Everybody Comes From Somewhere\". Word Ways. 16 (3). Butler University: 151\u2013152. Archived from the original on August 30, 2017. Retrieved May 11, 2017.^ \"Springfieldian\". Merriam Webster English Dictionary (Online\u00a0ed.). Springfield, MA: Merriam Webster, Inc. 2017. Archived from the original on August 30, 2016. Retrieved May 11, 2017. a native or resident of Springfield (such as Springfield in Illinois, Massachusetts, or Ohio): springfielder^ \"Total Real Gross Domestic Product for Springfield, MA (MSA)\". Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. January 2001. Archived from the original on December 27, 2017. Retrieved December 27, 2017.^ \"Find a County\". National Association of Counties. Archived from the original on May 31, 2011. Retrieved June 7, 2011.^ Phaneuf, Wayne (April 6, 2010). \"Abolitionist John Brown's years in Springfield Ma. transform his anti-slavery thoughts and actions\". Archived from the original on April 19, 2019.\"Resisting Slavery, Abolitionism & the Underground Railroad\". Our Plural History\u2014Springfield, MA. Springfield Technical Community College. 2009. Archived from the original on December 15, 2018.^ Springfield Armory National Historic Site\u2014Springfield Armory National Historic Site Archived March 23, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. Nps.gov (August 2, 2013). Retrieved on August 21, 2013.^ \"Western Massachusetts 2010\u20132011 Economic Review\" (PDF). March 22, 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 4, 2015. Retrieved October 16, 2014.^ Massachusetts Historical Commission. \"Historical & Archaeological Resources of the Connecticut River Valley: A Framework for Preservation Decisions\" (PDF). Retrieved February 28, 2024.^ \"Springfield, MA - Our Plural History\". ourpluralhistory.stcc.edu. Retrieved February 28, 2024.^ Barrows, Charles Henry (1911). The History of Springfield in Massachusetts for the Young: Being also in some part the history of other towns and cities in the county of Hampden. Connecticut Valley Historical Society. pp. 46\u201348^ Green, Mason Arnold (1888). \"Chapter II. 1638\u20131639\". Springfield, 1636\u20131886: History of Town and City. C. A. Nichols & Co. p.\u00a020. Archived from the original on February 15, 2023. Retrieved February 15, 2019.^ King, Moses (1885). King's Handbook of Springfield, Massachusetts. Franklin Press. p.\u00a09. ISBN\u00a09781152362826.^ \"Find in a Library: The Encyclopedia of New England\". worldcat.org. Archived from the original on October 17, 2014. Retrieved October 16, 2014.^ a b c \"Firsts | Springfield 375\". Springfield375.org. Archived from the original on May 21, 2013. Retrieved April 4, 2012.^ \"New Museum of Springfield History to Open October 10\u2014News\". Springfield Museums. September 24, 2009. Archived from the original on June 5, 2012. Retrieved April 4, 2012.^ Bianculli, Anthony J. (2002). Trains and Technology: the American Railroad in the Nineteenth Century. Vol. 2, Cars. Newark, Del. [u.a.]: University of Delaware Press. p.\u00a052. ISBN\u00a00-87413-730-6.^ Strahan, Derek (2017). Lost Springfield, Massachusetts. Charleston, SC: The History Press. pp.\u00a070\u201371.^ \"Springfield (Massachusetts)\". Collier's New Encyclopedia. New York. 1921.{{cite encyclopedia}}:  CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link)^ \"New Haven\u2013Hartford\u2013Springfield Rail Program\". nhhsrail.com. Archived from the original on October 6, 2011. Retrieved October 16, 2014.^ \"MGM Springfield\u2014Our Vision\". Archived from the original on August 25, 2012. Retrieved October 16, 2014.^ \"Springfield Redevelopment Authority: Union Station\". www3.springfield-ma.gov. Archived from the original on October 18, 2014. Retrieved October 16, 2014.^ \"Springfield Union Station: Springfield Redevelopment Authority\". www.springfield-ma.gov.^ Kinney, Jim (March 6, 2017). \"Grand opening date set for Springfield's Union Station\". masslive.^ \"City of Springfield Designated an American World War II Heritage City by National Park Service - Springfield Armory National Historic Site (U.S. National Park Service)\". www.nps.gov.^ \"City of Springfield Designated an American World War II Heritage City by National Park Service\". www.springfield-ma.gov. December 6, 2022.^ \"National Park Service announces new American World War II Heritage Cities - Office of Communications (U.S. National Park Service)\". www.nps.gov.^ \"Geographic Identifiers: 2010 Census Summary File 1 (G001): Springfield city, Massachusetts\". American Factfinder. U.S. Census Bureau. Archived from the original on February 13, 2020. Retrieved August 2, 2017.^ \"Amenities | Choose Springfield, Massachusetts\". Choosespringfieldmass.com. Archived from the original on March 24, 2012. Retrieved December 27, 2011.^ a b c Tower, J.E.; Gardner, E.C. (1905). Springfield Present and Prospective: The City of Homes. Pond & Campbell. p.\u00a086. Retrieved October 16, 2014.^ a b James Notchey. \"Massachusetts Tornado Outbreak Summary\u2014National Weather Service Forecast Office in Taunton, MA\". Erh.noaa.gov. Archived from the original on July 6, 2011. Retrieved June 28, 2011.^ \"Massachusetts News, Weather, Photos, Events\u2014Western Mass News\". Wggb.com. Archived from the original on October 2, 2011. Retrieved April 27, 2016.^ \"Four dead in Springfield tornadoes | WTNH.com Connecticut\". Wtnh.com. Archived from the original on June 3, 2011. Retrieved June 28, 2011.^ ThreadEx^ \"NowData \u2013 NOAA Online Weather Data\". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved May 30, 2021.^ \"Station: Hartford Bradley INTP AP, CT\". U.S. Climate Normals 2020: U.S. Monthly Climate Normals (1991\u20132020). National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved May 30, 2021.^ \"WMO Climate Normals for HARTFORD/BRADLEY INT'L ARPT CT 1961\u20131990\". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved September 17, 2020.^ \"Springfield, Massachusetts, USA - Monthly weather forecast and Climate data\". Weather Atlas. Retrieved July 4, 2019.^ Piyawut Inthasorn (May 14, 2010). \"Landscape Urbanism for the Highway city of Springfield North End\". scholarworks.umass.edu. Archived from the original on January 12, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2017.^ David M. Ahronian (2009). \"Making Connections\u2014Envisioning Springfield's North End\". scholarworks.umass.edu. Archived from the original on June 1, 2012. Retrieved July 12, 2017.^ \"Forest Park Heights Historic District\" (PDF). May 1, 2006. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 10, 2022. Retrieved October 16, 2014.^ \"Indian Orchard, 01151 | Choose Springfield, Massachusetts\". Choosespringfieldmass.com. Archived from the original on March 22, 2012. Retrieved January 24, 2019.^ a b [1] Archived January 22, 2009, at the Wayback Machine^ Steven Cecil (July 27, 2004). \"OLD HILL NEIGHBORHOOD MASTER PLAN\" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on October 10, 2022. Retrieved October 16, 2014.^ \"Ridgewood Historic District\" (PDF). May 1, 2006. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 10, 2022. Retrieved October 16, 2014.^ \"Lower Maple Historic District\" (PDF). May 1, 2006. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 10, 2022. Retrieved October 16, 2014.^ \"Maple Hill Historic District\" (PDF). May 1, 2006. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 10, 2022. Retrieved October 16, 2014.^ Chickering, Jesse (1846). Statistical view of the population of Massachusetts, 1765-1840. Boston: C.C. Little and J. Brown. p.\u00a060. Retrieved December 12, 2023.^ \"1950 Census of Population\" (PDF). Bureau of the Census. 1952. Section 6, Pages 21-7 through 21-09, Massachusetts Table 4. Population of Urban Places of 10,000 or more from Earliest Census to 1920. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 10, 2022. Retrieved July 12, 2011.^ \"1980 Census of Population\" (PDF). Census.gov. Bureau of the Census. 1981. Section 23, Page 23-11, Massachusetts Table 4. Population of County Subdivisions 1960 to 1980. Retrieved December 12, 2023.^ \"2010 Census of Population and Housing\" (PDF). Census.gov. U.S. Census Bureau. 2012. Section 23, Page 13, Massachusetts Table 8. Population and Housing Units: 1990 to 2010; and Area Measurements and Density: 2010. Retrieved December 12, 2023.^ \"\"Race.\" Decennial Census, DEC Redistricting Data (PL 94-171), Table P1, 2020\". data.census.gov. U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved December 12, 2023.^ \"City and Town Population Totals: 2020\u22122022\". United States Census Bureau. Retrieved November 24, 2023.^ [2] Archived December 21, 2012, at the Wayback Machine^ American FactFinder . Factfinder2.census.gov. Retrieved on August 2, 2013.^ a b QuickFacts for Springfield city / Massachusetts / United States, United States Census Bureau. Accessed February 9, 2017.^ \"Massachusetts\u2014Race and Hispanic Origin for Selected Cities and Other Places: Earliest Census to 1990\". U.S. Census Bureau. Archived from the original on August 12, 2012.^ \"2020 Census Springfield, Massachusetts\". www.census.gov. Archived from the original on September 22, 2021. Retrieved September 8, 2021.^ a b c \"Race and Hispanic Origin for Selected Cities and Other Places: Earliest Census to 1990\". U.S. Census Bureau. Archived from the original on August 12, 2012.^ a b From 15% sample^ \"SELECTED ECONOMIC CHARACTERISTICS 2009\u20132013 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates\". U.S. Census Bureau. Archived from the original on January 17, 2015. Retrieved January 12, 2015.^ \"ACS DEMOGRAPHIC AND HOUSING ESTIMATES 2009\u20132013 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates\". U.S. Census Bureau. Archived from the original on January 5, 2015. Retrieved January 12, 2015.^ \"HOUSEHOLDS AND FAMILIES 2009\u20132013 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates\". U.S. Census Bureau. Archived from the original on February 12, 2020. Retrieved January 12, 2015.^ \"2010 City Crime Rate Rankings\" (PDF). Os.cqpress.com. April 12, 2015. Archived from the original on April 12, 2015. Retrieved July 12, 2017.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link)^ Resource Library | Urban Land Institute Archived June 22, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Uli.org. Retrieved on July 15, 2013.^ \"Springfield crime rates and statistics\". NeighborhoodScout. August 15, 2010. Archived from the original on August 15, 2010. Retrieved February 5, 2019.^ \"Springfield crime rates and statistics\". NeighborhoodScout. January 30, 2019. Archived from the original on January 30, 2019.^ \"Industry by Occupation for the Civilian Employed Population 16 Years and Over [Springfield, MA-CT Metropolitan NECTA]\". US Census Bureau. 2016. Archived from the original on February 13, 2020. Retrieved October 9, 2018.^ \"Fortune 500 Companies 2018: Who Made The List\". Fortune. Meredith Corporation. Archived from the original on October 1, 2018. Retrieved October 1, 2018.^ MA Executive Office of Labor and Workforce Development: Largest 200 Employers in Hampden County Archived September 23, 2017, at the Wayback Machine (2017). Retrieved on May 10, 2017.^ \"Proposed Billion Dollar Bakeries Merger Vitally Concerns; Two Local Bakeries Already Linked Up with Big Combines\". Springfield Sunday Republican. Springfield, Mass. January 17, 1926. p.\u00a01.^ Jonathan Melle (November 10, 2007). \"Jonathan Melle on Politics: Shitty Pignatelli\u2014Top Down Politics of the BANAL! Also see Denis Guyer & Andrea Nuciforo & Carmen Massimiano\". Jonathanmelleonpolitics.blogspot.com. Archived from the original on July 8, 2011. Retrieved May 7, 2011.^ [3] Archived October 26, 2012, at the Wayback Machine^ Thomas, G. Scott (March 16, 2011). \"America's top 100 high-tech centers\". Archived from the original on October 28, 2012. Retrieved June 30, 2011.^ \"American FactFinder\". United States Census Bureau. Archived from the original on February 13, 2016. Retrieved April 14, 2012.^ Kinney, Jim (February 13, 2019). \"Rail car maker CRRC MA to build warehouse at East Springfield factory\". MassLive. Archived from the original on March 22, 2019. Retrieved March 22, 2019.^ \"Baystate Medical Center\u2014School of Medicine\u2014Tufts University\". Tufts.edu. Archived from the original on April 17, 2011. Retrieved April 3, 2011.^ a b \"Baystate Medical Center readies to open new emergency room with 3 times as much space, helipad\". November 30, 2012.^ \"Contact Us Archived February 18, 2010, at the Wayback Machine\". Merriam-Webster. Retrieved on October 27, 2009.^ \"Peter Pan Bus Lines agrees on move to Springfield's Union Station\". Masslive.com. May 9, 2017. Archived from the original on June 15, 2017. Retrieved July 12, 2017.^ \"Rolls-Royce in America\". Rolls-Royce Foundation. Archived from the original on October 15, 2017. Retrieved October 15, 2017.^ \"Phantom Gourmet: Red Rose In Springfield\". Phantom Gourmet/CBS 4. Boston. Archived from the original on March 29, 2016.^ Frigo's\u2014Springfield MA. Phantom Gourmet. April 16, 2015. Archived from the original on June 30, 2020. Retrieved September 11, 2019 \u2013 via Youtube.^ Chef Wayne's Big Mamou\u2014Springfield MA. Phantom Gourmet. October 4, 2015. Archived from the original on May 18, 2020. Retrieved September 11, 2019 \u2013 via Youtube.^ Bellamy, Fran. \"Nadim's Downtown offers best of both worlds for Springfield diners\". The Republican. Springfield, Mass. Archived from the original on May 23, 2020. Retrieved September 11, 2019.^ Santana, Lucila. \"Springfield's Puerto Rico Bakery and Restaurant owner Jorge Perez says basic business procedures keep business flourishing\". El Pueblo Latino. Springfield, Mass. Archived from the original on May 23, 2020. Retrieved September 11, 2019 \u2013 via MassLive.^ Whitehead, Margaret (December 7, 2018). \"The foodie guide to Springfield\". Daily Hampshire Gazette. Northampton, Mass. Archived from the original on May 23, 2020. Retrieved September 11, 2019.^ \"Greater Springfield Convention and Visitors Bureau\u2014Springfield Armory Big Band Concert\". Archived from the original on June 11, 2011. Retrieved July 12, 2017.^ \"The Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame: Enshrinement Tickets\". Hoophall.com. Archived from the original on May 25, 2011.^ \"Bright Nights at Forest Park\". www.brightnights.org. Archived from the original on December 4, 2022. Retrieved December 19, 2022.^ Ashley Kohl. \"Caribbean Festival in Springfield | MyMassAppeal.com\". Wwlp.com. Archived from the original on September 27, 2011.^ \"Glendi 2022\". Saint George Greek Orthodox Cathedral. Archived from the original on December 3, 2022. Retrieved December 16, 2022.^ \"Hampden Bank's Hoop City Jazz & Art Festival\". www.hoopcityjazz.org. Archived from the original on December 19, 2022. Retrieved December 19, 2022.^ \"Welcome | Mattoon Street Arts Festival Springfield, Mass\". Mattoonfestival.org. Archived from the original on September 5, 2012. Retrieved April 26, 2011.^ Republican, Cori Urban | Special to The (July 13, 2016). \"Our Lady of Mount Carmel feast in Springfield keeps tradition alive\". masslive. Archived from the original on December 19, 2022. Retrieved December 19, 2022.^ \"Parade of the Big Balloons\". Spirit of Springfield. December 18, 2022. Archived from the original on February 15, 2023. Retrieved December 18, 2022.^ \"Pioneer Valley Jewish Film Festival Welcome\". Pvjff.org. Archived from the original on July 2, 2012. Retrieved May 20, 2011.^ Goonan, Peter (June 4, 2011). \"Grassroots group plans first-ever Springfield Pride Week\". The Republican. Archived from the original on June 9, 2011. Retrieved June 4, 2011.^ Grout, Michelle. \"Springfield, LGBTQ+ Pride Parade!\". Springfield BID. Archived from the original on December 19, 2022. Retrieved December 19, 2022.^ \"Star Spangled Springfield\". Spirit of Springfield. December 18, 2022. Archived from the original on June 2, 2022. Retrieved December 18, 2022.^ \"The World's Largest Pancake Breakfast\". Spirit of Springfield. Archived from the original on July 8, 2011.^ \"The Museums\". Springfield Museums. July 2015. Archived from the original on June 28, 2011. Retrieved April 26, 2011.^ \"CONNECTICUT VALLEY HISTORICAL MUSEUM, Springfield\". June 18, 2010. Archived from the original on October 6, 2021. Retrieved October 6, 2021.^ Craggs, Ryan (June 5, 2017). \"A Museum Dedicated to Dr. Seuss Just Opened\". Cond\u00e9 Nast Traveler. Archived from the original on August 22, 2018. Retrieved August 21, 2018.^ \"Oh the Places You'll Go! Dr. Seuss museum opens its doors\". USA TODAY. June 5, 2017. Archived from the original on August 21, 2018. Retrieved August 21, 2018.^ \"Titanic Historical Society\". Titanic1.org. Archived from the original on May 22, 2011.^ \"Best and Worst Cities for Dating\". Yahoo! Real Estate. Archived from the original on March 14, 2012.^ Piyawut Inthasorn (May 14, 2010). \"Landscape Urbanism for the Highway city of Springfield North End\". scholarworks.umass.edu. Archived from the original on January 12, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2017.^ Michael McAuliffe; The Republican (May 5, 2010). \"Study by Urban Land Institute envisions revitalized Springfield waterfront\". masslive.com. Archived from the original on March 28, 2012. Retrieved June 18, 2011.^ \"City of Springfield, Mass.: Riverfront\". Springfieldcityhall.com. Archived from the original on July 3, 2008.^ \"History | St. John's Congregational Church | Springfield, MA\". Sjkb.org. June 22, 2010. Archived from the original on April 26, 2012. Retrieved December 27, 2011.^ \"Springfield Armory National Historic Site (U.S. National Park Service)\". Nps.gov. Archived from the original on March 23, 2016. Retrieved May 24, 2012.^ \"Walking Tour to Visit Outdoor Sculpture by Saint-Gaudens\u2014News\". Springfield Museums. July 23, 2009. Archived from the original on July 1, 2011. Retrieved April 14, 2011.^ Paul Cassel. \"WBZ and WBZA in the 20s and 30s\". Hammondmuseumofradio.org. Archived from the original on July 21, 2011. Retrieved June 10, 2011.^ Ochsner, Jeffrey Karl (1982). H.H. Richardson: Complete Architectural Works. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. p.\u00a025. ISBN\u00a0978-0-262-65015-1.^ \"City of Springfield, Mass.: Alphabetical Project Update List\". Springfieldcityhall.com. September 9, 2010. Archived from the original on July 16, 2011. Retrieved May 13, 2011.^ C.B. Tillinghast. The free public libraries of Massachusetts. 1st Report of the Free Public Library Commission of Massachusetts. Boston: Wright & Potter, 1891. Google books Archived February 15, 2023, at the Wayback Machine^ \"Springfield City Library\". Springfieldlibrary.org. Archived from the original on July 7, 2015. Retrieved July 12, 2017.^ July 1, 2007, through June 30, 2008; cf. The FY2008 Municipal Pie: What's Your Share? Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Board of Library Commissioners. Boston: 2009. Available: Municipal Pie Reports Archived January 23, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved August 4, 2010.^ July 1, 2008, through June 30, 2009; cf. Massachusetts Board of Library Commissioners (2011). \"FY 2009 Municipal Pie Report\". Archived from the original on January 23, 2012. Retrieved April 4, 2011.^ Springfield City Library (April 10, 2012). \"Library Catalogs & Electronic Databases\". Archived from the original on February 22, 2012. Retrieved May 15, 2012.^ \"Springfield's NBA Development League Team Unveils Name and Logo\". NBA. Archived from the original on July 3, 2009.^ \"MAAC Names MassMutual Center in Springfield Site for 2012\u20132014 MAAC Basketball Championships\". Maacsports.com. Archived from the original on July 14, 2011. Retrieved June 8, 2011.^ \"Pynchon Park\". Projectballpark.org. September 11, 1966. Archived from the original on September 19, 2010. Retrieved August 1, 2009.^ \"Green Cities\". Bestplaces.net. Archived from the original on June 23, 2022. Retrieved April 14, 2011.^ \"Springfield's monuments and memorials | masslive.com\". Photos.masslive.com. May 29, 2011. Archived from the original on August 24, 2011.^ \"Springfield, Massachusetts Neighborhoods on Walk Score\". Walkscore.com. Archived from the original on October 18, 2011. Retrieved December 27, 2011.^ \"Weddings and Corporate Events at the Carriage House at the Barney Estate, Forest Park, Springfield, MA 01108\". Barney Carriage House. Archived from the original on May 13, 2011. Retrieved April 22, 2011.^ Michael S. Gordon / The Republican (September 16, 2010). \"Springfield's Pynchon Park, rarely accessible since 1976, reopens after renovations\". masslive.com. Archived from the original on September 19, 2010. Retrieved April 22, 2011.^ \"Springfield Schools Superintendent Daniel Warwick touts students' gains in academics, attendance, behavior |\". masslive.com. October 4, 2013. Archived from the original on July 2, 2014. Retrieved October 16, 2014.^ Lynn Browne (September 14, 2009). \"Towards a More Prosperous Springfield, Massachusetts: Project Introduction and Motivation\" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on October 10, 2022. Retrieved October 16, 2014.^ \"Springfield, Mass. Capital Assets: The Campanile\". www3.springfield-ma.gov. Archived from the original on July 1, 2014. Retrieved October 16, 2014.^ Greenblatt, Alan (December 2018). \"This Small New England City Was on the Verge of Bankruptcy. Now It's a Turnaround Success Story\". Governing. Washington, DC: e.Republic. Archived from the original on August 21, 2019. Retrieved August 21, 2019.^ \"Western Massachusetts communities deal with cleanup costs in wake of October snowstorm\". masslive.com. December 27, 2011. Archived from the original on July 3, 2014. Retrieved October 16, 2014.^ \"Registration and Party Enrollment Statistics as of February 1, 2017\" (PDF). Massachusetts Elections Division. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 19, 2018. Retrieved July 6, 2018.^ Turner, Maureen (December 8, 2011). \"News\u2014Where Were They on Election Day? Apathy is too simple a way of explaining why 78 percent of Springfield voters didn't make it to the polls in November\". The Valley Advocate. Archived from the original on March 15, 2012. Retrieved May 22, 2019.^ \"PD43+\u00a0\u00bb 2020 President General Election Statewide (Showing only Hampden County)\". Archived from the original on September 8, 2022. Retrieved September 8, 2022.^ \"Council Makes History, President Fenton Promises Busy Year ...\u2014Western Mass Politics & Insight\". Wmasspi.com. January 6, 2014. Archived from the original on June 21, 2017. Retrieved July 12, 2017.^ \"Accela Meeting Portal\". springfieldcityma.iqm2.com. Archived from the original on July 10, 2017. Retrieved July 12, 2017.^ \"In Springfield, a Whitfield of Dreams Comes True Mid-term ...\" Western Mass Politics & Insight. Whitfield joined in mid-2018 after resignation of Thomas Ashe. September 25, 2018. Archived from the original on May 14, 2019. Retrieved May 14, 2019.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: others (link)^ \"Springfield Council Explores Strange New Duty, Boldly Chooses a Gomez for Ward 1\u2026\". Western Mass Politics & Insight. Gumersindo Gomez filled the seat his son Adam Gomez vacated after the latter joined the State Senate. March 9, 2021. Archived from the original on March 9, 2021. Retrieved May 14, 2019.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: others (link)^ Williams, Michelle (June 8, 2015). \"State awards $4.48 million to school turnaround efforts in Springfield, Worcester\". MassLive.com. Advance Publications. Archived from the original on November 13, 2020. Retrieved June 23, 2018.^ Catholic grade schools remade Archived March 28, 2012, at the Wayback Machine, The Republican, January 24, 2009^ Pioneer Valley Christian Academy Archived March 10, 2017, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved April 22, 2010.^ \"Massachusetts Academy\". Archived from the original on February 4, 2016. Retrieved April 27, 2016.^ \"Academy Hill School\". Academy Hill School. Archived from the original on July 1, 2017. Retrieved July 12, 2017.^ \"Western Massachusetts 2010\u20132011 Economic Review\" (PDF). January 10, 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 2, 2015. Retrieved October 16, 2014.^ \"Court Square Springfield, Mass.: Home Page\". Springfieldcityhall.com. July 13, 2011. Archived from the original on July 19, 2011.^ \"After You Apply\u00a0: Undergraduate Admissions\u00a0: Prospective Students\u00a0: Westfield State University\". Wsc.ma.edu. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011.^ \"Shays' Rebellion\u2014About This Project\". Shaysrebellion.stcc.edu. Archived from the original on July 20, 2011. Retrieved May 30, 2011.^ \"Local News\". The Reminder. Reminder Publications. October 1, 2009. Archived from the original on January 21, 2022. Retrieved January 21, 2022.^ \"AfAm Point of View\". AfAm Point of View. Archived from the original on June 28, 2017. Retrieved July 12, 2017.^ \"Springfield 375\u2014Springfield's Official 375th Anniversary Celebration Site\". July 21, 2013. Archived from the original on July 21, 2013. Retrieved July 12, 2017.^ Jim Kinney; The Republican (May 13, 2011). \"Public radio station WFCR-FM plans move from Amherst to Springfield\". masslive.com. Archived from the original on October 18, 2013. Retrieved May 15, 2011.^ \"Springfield Redevelopment Authority: Springfield Union Station\". Springfield-ma.gov. Archived from the original on June 29, 2015. Retrieved July 12, 2017.^ \"Destinations\". Bradleyairport.com. April 5, 2010. Archived from the original on June 4, 2012.^ \"Springfield\". Walk Score. Archived from the original on October 28, 2019. Retrieved October 28, 2019.^ \"Sixteen Acres, Springfield\". Walk Score. Archived from the original on October 28, 2019. Retrieved October 28, 2019.^ \"Indian Orchard, Springfield\". Walk Score. Archived from the original on October 28, 2019. Retrieved October 28, 2019.^ \"Metro Center, Springfield\". Walk Score. Archived from the original on October 28, 2019. Retrieved October 28, 2019.^ \"Home / Parks / Parks Facilities and Use / River Walk / More about River Walk\". City of Springfield. Archived from the original on March 31, 2016. Retrieved July 27, 2011.^ \"The Bewegen Bike Share System - Power Your Ride\". The Bewegen Bike Share System. Archived from the original on August 2, 2021. Retrieved May 27, 2021.^ \"ValleyBike will not offer bike share program in Springfield due to coronavirus\". MassLive.com. July 9, 2020. Archived from the original on April 16, 2021. Retrieved May 27, 2021.^ Pugliese, Ryan Trowbridge, Kaylee. \"ValleyBike launches locations in West Springfield\". Western Mass News (WGGB/WSHM). Retrieved May 27, 2021.{{cite web}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)[permanent dead link]^ About the Commission | Springfield Water and Sewer Commission Archived October 5, 2013, at the Wayback Machine. Waterandsewer.org. Retrieved on July 15, 2013.^ a b Water System History | Springfield Water and Sewer Commission Archived May 9, 2013, at the Wayback Machine. Waterandsewer.org. Retrieved on July 15, 2013.^ \"History\". Springfield Fire Department. Archived from the original on March 17, 2015. Retrieved April 2, 2015.^ Randal L. Hall and Sylvia Stallings Morris, eds, William Marsh Rice and His Institute: Centennial Edition (College Station: Texas A&M University Press, 2012), p.1.^ Chmielewski, Dawn C. \"Stephen M. Rivers dies at 55; Hollywood publicist and political activist\" Archived January 18, 2011, at the Wayback Machine, Los Angeles Times, June 9, 2010. Retrieved June 10, 2010.^ G\u00e4nzl, Kurt (March 3, 2021). \"Lucy Escott: Australia's greatest American prima donna\". Theatre Heritage Australia. Retrieved March 20, 2024.^ G\u00e4nzl, Kurt (2018). \"Lucy Escott\". Victorian Vocalists. Routledge. pp.\u00a0219\u2013223.^ Becker, Sy (July 12, 2018). \"Mayor from Italy visits Springfield\". WWLP 22 News. Archived from the original on August 21, 2019. Retrieved August 21, 2019.^ Springfield, Massachusetts and Takikawa City, Hokkaido Archived January 15, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. Massachusetts Hokkaido Association.^ \"Mayor Sarno and Congressman Neal Welcome Toireasa Ferris, Kerry County Councilor for Tralee, Ireland\". City of Springfield (Mass.). March 20, 2018. Archived from the original on May 23, 2020. Retrieved August 21, 2019.Further reading[edit]King, Moses, ed. (1884). King's Handbook of Springfield: A Series of Monographs, Historical and Descriptive. Springfield, Mass.: J. D. Gill. OCLC\u00a0960063143.Swift, Esther M. (1969). West Springfield Massachusetts: A Town History. West Springfield Heritage Association. OCLC\u00a069843.Atlas of Springfield City, Massachusetts. Boston, Massachusetts: Geo. H. Walker & Co. 1882.External links[edit]Springfield, Massachusetts  at Wikipedia's sister projectsMedia from CommonsTexts from WikisourceTravel information from WikivoyageData from WikidataCity of Springfield, Massachusetts Official city websiteGreater Springfield Convention and Visitors BureauSpringfield Chamber of CommerceHistorical Maps of Springfield from the Norman B. Leventhal Map Center at the Boston Public LibrarySpringfield's Civil War monumentsvte Springfield, MassachusettsTopicsAnnual eventsArts and CulturePublic artDemographicsEconomyEducationCooperating Colleges of Greater SpringfieldGeographyHistoric PlacesHistoryMediaPeoplePoliticsPublic LibraryPublic SchoolsSkyscrapersAttractionsBasketball Hall of FameConnecticut River Walk ParkDr. Seuss MemorialThe Eastern States Exposition (Big E)Forest ParkThe Zoo In Forest ParkStone Dog IIMassMutual CenterMGM SpringfieldMuseum of Fine ArtsMuseum of ScienceThe PuritanSix Flags New EnglandSmith Art MuseumSpringfield ArmorySymphony HallSpringfield Symphony OrchestraThe Titanic MuseumGovernmentCity councilCity HallFireMayorPoliceC3 policingSymbolsFlagSealEmblemNeighborhoodsBayBoston RoadEast Forest ParkEast SpringfieldForest ParkIndian OrchardMcKnightMason SquareMetro CenterApremont Triangle Historic DistrictCourt SquareMattoon St. Historic DistrictNorth EndBrightwoodLiberty HeightsMemorial SquareOld HillSix CornersSixteen AcresSouth EndUpper HillSportsBasketball Hall of FameValley Blue SoxSpringfield ThunderbirdsTransportationPeter Pan Bus LinesPioneer Valley Transit AuthoritySpringfield Expressway (I-291)Springfield Union StationHartford LineNortheast RegionalLake Shore LimitedValley FlyerVermonterHampden CountyGreater SpringfieldPioneer ValleyMassachusettsUnited StatesPlaces adjacent to Springfield, MassachusettsWest SpringfieldChicopeeLudlowWest Springfield/Connecticut RiverSpringfield, MassachusettsWilbrahamAgawamLongmeadowEast LongmeadowArticles relating to SpringfieldvteMunicipalities and communities of Hampden County, Massachusetts, United StatesCounty seat: SpringfieldCitiesAgawamChicopeeEast LongmeadowHolyokePalmerSpringfieldWest SpringfieldWestfieldTownsBlandfordBrimfieldChesterGranvilleHampdenHollandLongmeadowLudlowMonsonMontgomeryRussellSouthwickTollandWalesWilbrahamCDPsBlandfordChesterHollandMonson CenterRussellWilbrahamOthervillagesBondsville\u2021Depot VillageFeeding HillsThree RiversFootnotes\u2021This populated place also has portions in an adjacent county or countiesMassachusetts portalUnited States portalvteCommonwealth of MassachusettsBoston (capital)TopicsIndexAdministrative divisionsCongressional districtsElectionsGeographyGeologyGovernmentHistoryImagesLawLighthousesMusicPeopleState symbolsTransportationVillagesTourist attractionsWindmillsSocietyAbortionCultureClimate changeCrimeDemographicsEconomyEducationHistory of educationGun lawsHomelessnessLGBT rightsPoliticsSportsRegionsCape AnnCentral Massachusetts (Blackstone Valley, Montachusett-North County, South County)Greater BostonGreater LowellMerrimack ValleyMetroWestNorth ShoreSoutheastern Massachusetts (Cape Cod, South Coast, South Shore)Western Massachusetts (The Berkshires, Housatonic Valley, Pioneer Valley, Quabbin-Swift River Valley)CountiesBarnstableBerkshireBristolDukesEssexFranklinHampdenHampshireMiddlesexNantucketNorfolkPlymouthSuffolkWorcesterNote: Nine former counties were in the District of MaineCitiesAgawamAmherstAmesburyAttleboroBarnstableBeverlyBostonBraintreeBridgewaterBrocktonCambridgeChelseaChicopeeEast LongmeadowEasthamptonEverettFall RiverFitchburgFraminghamFranklinGardnerGloucesterGreenfieldHaverhillHolyokeLawrenceLeominsterLowellLynnMaldenMarlboroughMedfordMelroseMethuenNew BedfordNewburyportNewtonNorth AdamsNorthamptonPalmerPeabodyPittsfieldQuincyRandolphRevereSalemSomervilleSouthbridgeSpringfieldTauntonWalthamWatertownWestfieldWest SpringfieldWeymouthWinthropWoburnWorcesterNote: Municipalities not listed have a town meeting form of government (see all municipalities)\u00a0Massachusetts portalvteNew EnglandTopicsAutumnClimateCuisineCultureDemographicsEconomyElectionsFlagGeographyGeologyGovernmentHistoryPrehistoryNew England ColoniesDominion of New EnglandNew England ConfederationLiteraturePlace names of Native-American originPoliticsSportsStatesConnecticutMaineMassachusettsNew HampshireRhode IslandVermontMajor citiesBridgeportBrocktonBurlingtonCambridgeDanburyFall RiverLowellManchesterNew BedfordNew HavenNorwalkPortlandQuincySomervilleSpringfieldStamfordWaterburyWorcesterState capitalsAugustaBostonConcordHartfordMontpelierProvidenceTransportationPassenger railMBTA (MA, RI)CapeFLYER (MA)Northeast Corridor (CT, MA, RI)Acela (CT, MA, RI)Downeaster (ME, NH, MA)Vermonter (CT, MA, NH, VT)Shore Line East (CT)Metro-North (CT)Hartford Line (CT, MA)New Haven Line (CT)Valley Flyer (CT, MA)Hartford Line (Amtrak) (CT, MA)Major InterstatesI-84 (CT, MA)I-89 (NH, VT)I-90 (Mass Pike) (MA)I-91 (CT, MA, VT)I-93 (MA, NH, VT)I-95 (CT, RI, MA, NH, ME)defunct: New England road marking systemAirportsBradley (CT)Burlington (VT)T. F. Green (RI)Manchester\u2013Boston (NH)Logan (MA)New Haven (CT)Portland (ME)Worcester (MA)\u00a0New England portal Category CommonsvteConnecticut River watershedTributariesConnecticutBlackledge RiverCoginchaug RiverConnecticut RiverDuck RiverEightmile RiverFalls RiverFarmington RiverHockanum RiverHubbard RiverJeremy RiverLieutenant RiverMattabesset RiverNepaug RiverPameacha CreekPark RiverPequabuck RiverSalmon RiverScantic RiverMassachusettsBurnshirt RiverChapel BrookChicopee RiverConnecticut RiverCranberry RiverDeerfield RiverEast Brookfield RiverFarmington RiverFall RiverFive Mile RiverGreen RiverHubbard RiverManhan RiverMill River (Northampton)Mill River (Springfield)Millers RiverMirey BrookNorth Branch Millers RiverNorth Branch Westfield RiverNorth RiverOtter RiverQuaboag RiverScantic RiverSeven Mile RiverTarbell BrookWare RiverWestfield RiverNew HampshireAmmonoosuc RiverAshuelot RiverBlow-me-down BrookThe BranchCold RiverConnecticut RiverEast Branch Mohawk RiverGale RiverGreat BrookHalls StreamHam BranchIndian RiverIndian StreamIsrael RiverJohns RiverKnox RiverLittle RiverLittle Sugar RiverMascoma RiverMillers RiverMink BrookMirey BrookMohawk RiverNash StreamNorth Branch Gale RiverNorth Branch Millers RiverNorth Branch Sugar RiverNorth Branch Upper Ammonoosuc RiverOliverian BrookOtter BrookPartridge BrookPerry StreamPhillips BrookSimms StreamSouth Branch Ashuelot RiverSouth Branch Gale RiverSouth Branch Israel RiverSouth Branch Sugar RiverStocker BrookSugar RiverTarbell BrookUpper Ammonoosuc RiverWest Branch Mohawk RiverWest Branch Upper Ammonoosuc RiverWild Ammonoosuc RiverZealand RiverVermontBlack RiverConnecticut RiverDeerfield RiverFall RiverGreen RiverHalls StreamLeach CreekMoose RiverNulhegan RiverOmpompanoosuc RiverOttauquechee RiverPassumpsic RiverRock RiverSaxtons RiverUtley BrookWaits RiverWells RiverWest RiverWhetstone BrookWhite RiverWilliams RiverWinhall RiverLakesConnecticutBarkhamsted ReservoirLake BeseckLake HaywardLake PocotopaugMassachusettsBrooks PondBrowning PondLake MonomonacQuabbin ReservoirLake WyolaNew HampshireAshuelot PondBack LakeCanaan Street LakeCedar PondChristine LakeComerford ReservoirConnecticut LakesCrystal LakeDublin PondEastman PondEcho LakeLake Francis (Murphy Dam)Goose PondGrafton PondGranite LakeLakes of the CloudsLittle Sunapee LakeMascoma LakeMcIndoes ReservoirLake MonomonacMoore ReservoirPearly LakeSilver LakeSpofford LakeLake SunapeeSurry Mountain LakeLake TarletonVermontBall Mountain LakeComerford ReservoirHarriman ReservoirHarvey's LakeMcIndoes ReservoirMoore ReservoirNorth Hartland LakeLake RescueTownshend LakeTownsConnecticutChesterCromwellDeep RiverEast HaddamEast HamptonEast HartfordEast WindsorEnfieldEssexGlastonburyHaddamHartfordHigganumLymeMiddletownMoodusOld LymeOld SaybrookPortlandRocky HillSouth WindsorSuffieldThompsonvilleWethersfieldWindsorWindsor LocksMassachusettsAgawamChicopeeDeerfieldEasthamptonGillGreenfieldHadleyHatfieldHolyokeLongmeadowMillers FallsMontagueNorthamptonNorthfieldSouth HadleySpringfieldSunderlandTurners FallsWest SpringfieldWhatelyNew HampshireBathCharlestownChesterfieldClaremontClarksvilleColebrookColumbiaCornishDaltonGrovetonHanoverHaverhillHinsdaleLancasterLebanonLittletonLymeMonroeNorthumberlandOrfordPiermontPittsburgPlainfieldStewartstownStratfordWalpoleWest LebanonWestmorelandWoodsvilleQuebecEast HerefordVermontAscutneyBarnetBeecher FallsBellows FallsBloomfieldBradfordBrattleboroBrunswickCanaanConcordDummerstonFairleeGilmanGuildhallHartfordHartlandLemingtonLunenburgMaidstoneNewburyNorwichPutneyRockinghamRyegateSpringfieldThetfordVernonWaterfordWeathersfieldWells RiverWestminsterWhite River JunctionWilderWindsorCrossingsAmtrak Old Saybrook \u2013 Old Lyme BridgeArch BridgeBulkeley BridgeCalvin Coolidge BridgeCanalside Rail Trail BridgeCheshire BridgeColumbia BridgeCornish\u2013Windsor Covered BridgeDexter Coffin BridgeFrench King BridgeGill\u2013Montague BridgeHampden County Memorial BridgeJanice Peaslee BridgeJoseph E. Muller BridgeLedyard BridgeLyme\u2013East Thetford BridgeMorey Memorial BridgeMount Orne Covered BridgeNorwottuck Rail Trail BridgePiermont BridgePittsburg\u2013Clarksville Covered BridgeRanger BridgeRaymond E. Baldwin BridgeSunderland BridgeVietnam Memorial BridgeWells River BridgeWillimansett BridgevteNortheast megalopolis major urban regionsCore cities are metropolitan core cities of at least a million people. The other areas are urban areas of cities that have an urban area of 150,000+ or of a metropolitan area of at least 250,000+. Satellite cities are in italics.Mid-AtlanticCore citiesBaltimorecityDelaware ValleyPhiladelphiaCamdenWilmingtonHampton RoadsVirginia BeachNorfolkNewport NewsNew YorkcityNewarkJersey CityPatersonElizabethRichmondcityWashingtoncityArlingtonAlexandriaOther areasAtlantic CityHagerstowncityHarrisburgcityLancasterLehigh ValleyAllentown\u2013Bethlehem-EastonNortheastern PennsylvaniaScranton/Wilkes-BarrePoughkeepsie\u2013Newburghcity 1city 2ReadingSalisburycityTrentonYorkCombined areasWashington\u2013BaltimoreNew EnglandCore citiesBostoncityCambridgeHartfordcityProvidencecityOther areasBarnstableBridgeport\u2013Stamford\u2013Norwalkcity 1city 2city 3DanburycityManchesterNashuaNew BedfordNew HavencityNorwich\u2013New LondonPortlandcitySpringfieldcityWaterburyWorcesterCombined areasBoston\u2013ProvidenceBridgeport\u2013Stamford\u2013New HavenHartford\u2013SpringfieldOther megaregionsvteNortheastern United StatesTopicsCultureGeographyGovernmentHistoryStatesConnecticutDelawareMarylandMassachusettsNew HampshireNew JerseyNew YorkMainePennsylvaniaRhode IslandVermontFederal districtsDistrict of ColumbiaMajor citiesAllentownAlexandriaArlingtonBaltimoreBostonBridgeportBuffaloBurlingtonCambridgeElizabethErieHartfordJersey CityLowellManchesterNew HavenNew York CityNewarkPatersonPhiladelphiaPittsburghPortlandProvidenceQuincyReadingRochesterScrantonSpringfieldStamfordSyracuseWashington, D.C.WaterburyWilmingtonWorcesterState capitalsAlbanyAnnapolisAugustaBostonConcordDoverHartfordHarrisburgMontpelierProvidenceTrentonSee alsoNortheast megalopolisvteCounty seats of MassachusettsBarnstableBostonBrocktonCambridgeDedhamEdgartownGreenfieldLawrenceLowellNantucketNorthamptonPittsfieldPlymouthSalemSpringfieldTauntonWorcesterAuthority control databases InternationalVIAFWorldCatNationalGermanyIsraelUnited StatesCzech RepublicGeographicMusicBrainz areaOtherNARAIdRefRetrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Springfield,_Massachusetts&oldid=1221772103\""},{"link": "https://en.wikipedia.org//wiki/Mixed-sex_sports", "content": "Sports in which the participants are not limited to one gender onlyA mixed-gender badminton matchAn unofficial mixed doubles match of beach volleyball.Mixed-sex sports (also known as coed sports) are individual and team sports whose participants are not of a single sex.  In organised sports settings, rules usually dictate an equal number of people of each sex in a team (for example teams of one man and one woman). Usually, the main purpose of these rules are to account for physiological sex differences. Mixed-sex sports in informal settings are typically groups of neighbours, friends or family playing without regard to the sex of the participants. Mixed-sex play is also common in youth sports as before puberty and adolescence, sport-relevant sex differences affect performance far less.There are multiple dynamics to mixed-sex sports teams . Where sex differences in human physiology do not play a significant role in a person's proficiency in a sport, then men and women may compete in a single open class, as in equestrian sports. When sex is a major factor in a competitor's performance, sports will typically split men and women into separate divisions, but there may be mixed-sex team variants, such as mixed doubles. In artistic judged sports, these physical differences play a key role in performances, as demonstrated in pair figure skating and acrobatic gymnastics.Mixed-sex sport events may be organised to achieve certain social aims, such as boosting female participation in sport, as a form of exercise, or to improve social harmony between the sexes.[1]Direct competition[edit]It is uncommon in most organised sports to find individuals of different genders competing head-to-head at elite levels, principally due to physiological differences between the (adult) sexes. In sports where these differences are less linked to performance, it is standard practice for men and women to compete in mixed-sex fields. These open-class sports prove accommodating to intersex athletes, who challenge sex-defined rules of both single-sex events and mixed-sex teams with distinct male and female composition.Equestrian at the 2012 Summer Olympics \u2013 Team dressage, 7 of 9 medalists are womenIn equestrian sports, male and female riders compete against each other in eventing, dressage and show jumping disciplines. Female jockeys compete alongside male ones in horse racing, though they constitute a minority of jockeys overall. Beyond the human athletes, male and female horses are found in racing, with a roughly 60/40 split at the top level between colts and fillies.[2]In snooker, the professional tour is open to men and women, with for instance four female players competing on the main tour in 2023/24 (Reanne Evans, Mink Nutcharut, Rebecca Kenna and Baipat Siripaporn).[3] In addition, the separate women-only tour encourages female participation in the sport.[4]In croquet, three women have won the British Association Croquet Open Championship: Lily Gower in 1905, Dorothy Steel in 1925, 1933, 1935 and 1936, and Hope Rotherham in 1960. In 2018, two international Golf Croquet championships open to both sexes were won by women: Rachel Gee of England beat Pierre Beaudry to win the European Golf Croquet championship, and Hanan Rashad of Egypt beat Yasser Fathy (also from Egypt) to win the World over-50s championship. The mixed division is a staple of Ultimate (without being the standard)\u2014it is the only division showcased at both the 2013 and 2017 World Games. Seven-player mixed teams (4 men plus 3 women, or 4 women plus 3 men) directly compete. While most often players mark opponents of the same gender, match-ups between people of different gender are not uncommon to see. Open divisions are common in Ultimate, where sex/gender is not explicitly relevant in team composition\u2014although at highest competitive levels male players predominate these divisions. Accordingly, although women's divisions are also common, men's are not (only appearing in settings without open divisions).In sport shooting, the physical demands are lower relative to other sports, though fatigue and grip may be different between sexes. Research is conflicting about the influence of sex in the performance of shooters.[5]In 1966 the International Shooting Sport Federation published its open events as mixed. From 1968 to 1980, men and women competed together in Olympic shooting.[6]In the NCAA, the main governing body of college/university sports in the US, the only sport in which men and women compete against one another directly is rifle shooting. While male and female riders compete against one another in international equestrian sports, NCAA-recognized competition is open only to women, currently as part of the NCAA Emerging Sports for Women program. The NCAA awards a combined men's and women's team championship in two sports\u2014fencing and skiing\u2014but all individual bouts or races involve members of the same sex, and teams field separate men's and women's squads.In dog sled racing, male and female mushers are in direct competition. About 1/3rd of mushers in the Iditarod are female, and finishers in the top ten are proportionately split by gender.[7]In most forms of motorsport, men and women are allowed to compete in direct competition. There are some series which are female only in an effort to promote women in motorsport, most notably W Series and Formula Women. However, these series have caught criticism for segregating female drivers as opposed to supporting them in their own campaigns.Mixed doubles or pairs[edit]Further information: Mixed doublesA mixed-sex pair, participating in FINA World Championships of synchronised swimming, waves to the crowd before diving into water.A mixed-sex pair doing Figure skating.A common form of mixed-sex event is for pairs of one male and one female.Sports based on dancing usually have male/female pairings, such as ice dancing, pair figure skating, ballroom dancing and synchronised swimming duets. In these sports/events, the male and female participants physically work together (often to music) to jointly produce an artistic athletic performance. Similarly, taekwondo poomsae, which is performance-based, also has a mixed pair event.Mixed doubles are events where two mixed-sex pairs directly compete (that is, all four competitors are in open play as two teams). This is particularly found in racket sports (which rarely have larger teams), including tennis, table tennis, badminton, squash and racquetball.Pairs may also compete in turn-based games: one format (out of many) alternates the woman and man of each pair just as the competing sides alternate, so each round has four turns of individual action. Well-suited to strategy-based sports (such as mixed doubles curling, mixed golf, mixed bowling, mixed team darts) where players can beneficially undertake mental planning or assessment while waiting for their turn.[8] Separate male and female performances may also be scored then added to produce mixed team results in such sports as diving. Synchronised diving is also found in mixed-sex format. In professional wrestling, mixed tag team matches do not explicitly alternate in a turn-based manner but each wrestler only faces their opponent of the same sex (switching occurs at players' discretion).[9][10] Intergender wrestling between a man and a woman also occurs but is scripted like other professional wrestling.Mixed relay[edit]In non-vehicular racing sports the physiological differences between the sexes often preclude head-to-head competition between people of different sexes at the elite level. Mixed-sex events are often held though with a relay race format.In running, a 4 \u00d7 400 m mixed relay race was introduced at the 2017 IAAF World Relays, and added to the 2019 World Athletics Championships (details) and 2020 Summer Olympics (details). In addition, a 2 \u00d7 2 \u00d7 400 m and shuttle hurdles mixed relay races were introduced at the 2019 IAAF World Relays. The Match Europe v USA in 2019 had a mixed 200+200+400+800 m sprint medley relay.In cross country running, a 4 \u00d7 2\u00a0km mixed relay race was added at the 2017 IAAF World Cross Country Championships.In swimming, mixed relay races were introduced at the 2014 FINA World Swimming Championships (25 m) (4 \u00d7 50 m freestyle and medley), the 2015 World Aquatics Championships (4 \u00d7 100 m freestyle and medley), and the 2020 Summer Olympics (4 \u00d7 100 m medley). In open water swimming, mixed-gendered relays were introduced at the 2011 World Aquatics Championships (4 \u00d7 1250 m).In triathlon, the ITU Triathlon Mixed Relay World Championships mixed relay race has been held since 2009. Also, the triathlon at the Youth Olympic Games has a mixed relay race since 2010, and the event was introduced at the 2020 Summer Olympics (details). As in standard triathlons, each triathlon competitor must do a segment of swimming, cycling and running.In biathlon, a mixed relay race was first held at the Biathlon World Championships 2005 in Khanty-Mansiysk (4 \u00d7 6\u00a0km), and it was added to the 2014 Winter Olympics (4 \u00d7 6\u00a0km / 7.5\u00a0km).In road cycling, the 2019 UCI Road World Championships introduced a team time trial mixed relay where first three men and then three women ride together as a national team.[11] Distances vary in road cycling. The 2019 race was 2 \u00d7 14\u00a0km.In mountain biking, the UCI Mountain Bike World Championships has a mixed team relay race since 1999.Mixed team sports[edit]In adventure racing teams of 4 must include at least 1 member of the opposite sex. Archery also incorporates mixed-team competition (which can also be seen at the Olympic level).In a number of countries, club underwater hockey is mixed-sex with any ratio of sex allowed. However, national teams usually compete in single sex teams.Mixed team ball sports[edit]Mixed-sex forms of ball sports involve set numbers of each sex per team, sometimes defining the roles in the team by sex/gender (examples include korfball, Baseball5, coed softball, quadball, dodgeball, touch/tag rugby, American flag rugby,Flag football, wheelchair handball, and wheelchair rugby, wheelchair rugby league, and Netball).Olympics[edit]See also: Participation of women in the OlympicsAncient[edit]Sports were almost never mixed in any way in ancient Greece.[12] Women were forbidden from competing in or viewing the ancient Olympic games.[note 1] They competed at the separate Heraean games, from which men were excluded.[15] Although taking place in the same stadium as the Olympic games and also every four years, it was an unrelated festival (of Hera) with fewer sport events, none of which exactly matched Olympic counterparts. Olympic winners were honoured in the Sanctuary of Zeus; Heraean winners at the Temple of Hera (where since 1936 the modern movement has lit and kept the Olympic Flame).[16]Modern[edit]Andy Murray and Laura Robson competing in the tennis mixed doubles event at the 2012 Summer Olympics.Mixed-sex sport has a long history at the modern Olympic Games, dating back to the 1900 Summer Olympics (the first in which women participated). Two women competed against men in equestrian events,[17] the croquet competition was mixed-sex,[18] and H\u00e9l\u00e8ne de Pourtal\u00e8s was the sole female sailor, achieving the Olympics' first mixed-sex team champion as part of the gold medal-winning Swiss team.[19] The sole time Olympic motorboating was held (1908), Sophia Gorham took part in a mixed British team.[20]Mixed doubles tennis was first contested in 1900 but fell off the programme after 1924 before being reintroduced in 2012.[21] Mixed doubles badminton was introduced in 1996.[22]Pair figure skating was present at the summer games in 1908 and 1920 before continuing as a founding event at the first Winter Olympic Games.[23] Ice dancing expanded the mixed figure skating programme in 1976.[24]Sailing at the Summer Olympics was mostly mixed-sex up to 1988 but grew increasingly divided, with no mixed sailing events being held in 2012.[25] Similarly, shooting at the Summer Olympics continued on a mixed basis in several events from 1968 to 1992, before competitors were restricted by sex.[26]There was an increased focus on mixed-sex competition at the start of the 21st century, with new introductions including mixed biathlon relay, team figure skating, and luge mixed team relay in 2014, then Nacra 17 in 2016, and mixed doubles curling and mixed team alpine skiing in 2018. Mixed team shooting events and table tennis mixed doubles are set for inauguration at the 2020 Summer Olympics.[27][28] Mixed-sex relay events are also slated for the 2020 athletics and swimming programmes. These changes resulted from an International Olympic Committee initiative to increase women's participation towards parity with men's \u2013 the recasting of men's events as mixed-sex ones was a part of this initiative.[29] Ski jumping competitions also include mixed team events.Baseball5 will be played at the 2026 Summer Youth Olympics, and will be the first Olympic team sport involving mixed-sex teams.[30]Transgender inclusion[edit]Main article: Transgender people in sportsIn the 2020s, in response to anti-transgender sentiment in sports, several international and national sports federations prohibited transgender athletes from competing in the female category and created a separate \"open\" category to allow for transgender, non-binary or cisgender male athletes to participate, including the British Triathlon Federation,[31] International Swimming Federation (FINA)[32] and British Cycling.[33] This has created de facto mixed-sex sports competitions. Such open categories have been criticized by transgender athletes and LGBT rights activists as transphobic. In addition, few athletes have signed up for open-category competitions, such as that for the 2023 World Aquatics Championships.[34]See also[edit]Battle of the Sexes (tennis)Mixed-sex educationWomen's sportsWomen's professional sportsNotes[edit]^ Penalty was being thrown from the cliffs of Mount Typaion.[13][14]References[edit]^ Playing Together\u2014Values and Arrangements of Coed Sports. T&F Online. Retrieved 2018-05-19.^ MacKenzie, Sheen (2013-06-28). Racing's battle of the sexes -- on four legs. CCN. Retrieved 2018-05-19.^ \"Players On The Main Tour\". www.snooker.org. Hermund \u00c5rdalen.^ \"About WWS\". www.womenssnooker.com. World Women's Snooker.^ Mon-L\u00f3pez, Daniel; Tejero-Gonz\u00e1lez, Carlos M.; Calero, Santiago (13 May 2019). \"Recent changes in women's Olympic shooting and effects in performance\". PLOS ONE. 14 (5): e0216390. Bibcode:2019PLoSO..1416390M. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0216390. ISSN\u00a01932-6203. PMC\u00a06513084. PMID\u00a031083662.^ \"The ISSF History\". www.issf-sports.org. ISSF.^ \"Meet the Women of the Iditarod\". Outside Online.^ Storm Open Festival of Bowling featuring the National Mixed Tournament. National Mixed. Retrieved 2018-05-19.^ Schwartz, Nick (2017-12-13). WWE is launching a mixed tag team tournament that will air on Facebook. USA Today. Retrieved 2018-05-19.^ 7 Times WWE Had Mixed Gender Tag Matches at WrestleMania. What Culture. Retrieved 2018-05-19.^ \"Team Time Trial Mixed Relay\". Yorkshire 2019 UCI Road World Championships. Archived from the original on 2019-12-29. Retrieved 2019-09-22.^ Judith Swaddling (2011-02-17), \"Women at the Heraia\" (Multi-media gallery), Ancient Greek Olympics Gallery (History), retrieved 2019-06-12^ \"A whiff of TROUBLE? | Jacksonville.com\".^ Young, Lauren (2016-08-10). \"When Ancient Greece Banned Women From Olympics, They Started Their Own\". Atlas Obscura. Retrieved 2022-06-05.^ Spears, Betty (Summer 1984), \"A Perspective of the History of Women's Sport in Ancient Greece\" (PDF), Journal of Sport History (Official publication of the North American Society for Sport History.), vol.\u00a011, no.\u00a02, University of Illinois Press, pp.\u00a032\u201347, ISSN\u00a00094-1700, S2CID\u00a030379765, archived from the original (PDF) on 2018-08-20, retrieved 2019-06-12.^ Pausanias, Olympia: Passages from Pausanias (William Murray Class Website), 5.15.1\u20136, archived from the original on November 9, 2005, retrieved 2019-06-12^ Equestrianism at the 1900 Paris Summer Games: Mixed Hacks And Hunter Combined. Sports Reference. Retrieved 2018-05-19.^ Croquet at the 1900 Paris Summer Games. Sports Reference Retrieved 2018-05-19.^ H\u00e9l\u00e8ne de Pourtal\u00e8s. Sports Reference. Retrieved 2018-05-19.^ Sophia Gorham. Sports Reference. Retrieved 2018-05-19.^ Tennis Mixed Doubles Medalists. Sports Reference. Retrieved 2018-05-19.^ Mixed Doubles Badminton. Sports Reference. Retrieved 2018-05-19.^ Figure Skating Mixed Pairs Medalists. Sports Reference. Retrieved 2018-05-19.^ Figure Skating at the Olympics. Sports Reference. Retrieved 2018-05-19.^ Sailing. Sports Reference. Retrieved 2018-05-19.^ Shooting. Sports Reference. Retrieved 2018-05-19.^ Table Tennis Mixed Doubles Added to Tokyo 2020. ITTF (2017-06-09). Retrieved 2018-05-19.^ ISSF approves mixed gender shooting events for 2020 Tokyo Olympics First Post (2017-02-24). Retrieved 2018-05-19.^ Olympics Shift: IOC Doubles Number Of Mixed-Gender Events, Adds 5 Sports. NPR (2017-06-09). Retrieved 2018-05-19.^ \"Debut of Baseball5 at Youth Olympic Games postponed as next YOG shifted from 2022 to 2026\". World Baseball Softball Confederation. Retrieved 2022-11-21.^ Baska, Maggie (6 July 2022). \"British Triathlon bans trans athletes from women's competitions and announces 'open' category\".^ \"Transgender swimmers barred from women's events\". Al Jazeera. 2022-06-19. Retrieved 2022-06-20.^ \"British Cycling to ban trans women from female events\". BBC Sport. Retrieved 26 May 2023.^ \"Update on the Open Category competitions at the World Aquatics Swimming World Cup \u2013 Berlin 2023\". World Aquatics. 2023-10-03. Retrieved 2023-12-25.External links[edit]Could high school sports be coed?Retrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mixed-sex_sports&oldid=1215904533\""},{"link": "https://en.wikipedia.org//wiki/Basketball_(ball)", "content": "Inflated ball used for basketball gamesA typical basketballA basketball is a spherical ball used in basketball games. Basketballs usually range in size from very small promotional items that are only a few inches (some centimeters) in diameter to extra large balls nearly 2 feet (60\u00a0cm) in diameter used in training exercises. For example, a youth basketball could be 27 inches (69\u00a0cm) in circumference, while a National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) men's ball would be a maximum of 30 inches (76\u00a0cm) and an NCAA women's ball would be a maximum of 29 inches (74\u00a0cm). The standard for a basketball in the National Basketball Association (NBA) is 29.5 inches (75\u00a0cm) in circumference and for the Women's National Basketball Association (WNBA), a maximum circumference of 28.5 inches (72\u00a0cm). High school and junior leagues normally use NCAA, NBA or WNBA sized balls.[1][2]Aside from the court and the baskets, the basketball is the only piece of equipment necessary to play the game of basketball. During the game, the ball must be bounced continuously (dribbling), thrown through the air to other players (passing) or thrown towards the basket (shooting). Therefore, the ball must be very durable and easy to hold on to. The ball is also used to perform tricks (sometimes called freestyling), the most common of which are spinning the ball on the tip of one's index finger, dribbling in complex patterns, rolling the ball over one's shoulder, or performing aerobatic maneuvers with the ball while executing a slam dunk, most notably in the context of a slam dunk contest.Characteristics[edit]Nearly all basketballs have an inflatable inner rubber bladder, generally wrapped in layers of fiber and then covered with a  surface made either from leather (traditional), rubber, or a synthetic composite. As in most inflatable balls, there is a small opening that allows the pressure to be increased or decreased.The surface of the ball is nearly always divided by \"ribs\" that are recessed below the surface of the ball in a variety of configurations and are generally a contrasting color. An orangish surface with black ribs and a possible logo is the traditional color scheme of basketballs but they are sold in various colors.  Most famous of these variations, a red/white/blue basketball, was used for the American Basketball Association, the Harlem Globetrotters, and as the \"money ball\" in the NBA All-Star Weekend's Three Point Contest.Balls are generally designated for indoor (generally made of leather or absorbent composites), or all-surface use (generally made of rubber or durable composites, also known as indoor/outdoor balls). Indoor balls tend to be more expensive than all-surface balls due to the cost of materials. In addition, brand new all-leather indoor balls must be \"broken in\" first to achieve optimal grip before use in competition. The abrasiveness of asphalt and the dirt and moisture present in an outdoor setting will usually ruin an indoor ball within a very short period of time, which is why an indoor/outdoor ball is recommended for recreational players. Outdoor balls are commonly made from rubber to cope with rougher conditions, and they need to be filled with more air to retain a suitable level of air pressure in colder weather.Sizes[edit]Different sizes are used for different age groups.[3][4] The common standards are:SizeTypeCircumferenceWeightNotes on basketball7Men750\u2013770\u00a0mm29.5\u201330.3\u00a0in[4]580\u2013620\u00a0g20\u201322\u00a0oz[4]Men and boys ages 15 and up. This is the official size for men's high school, college, and professional.6Women715\u2013730\u00a0mm28.1\u201328.7\u00a0in[4]510\u2013550\u00a0g18\u201319\u00a0oz[4]Boys ages 12\u201314. Women and girls ages 12 and up. This is the official size for women\u2019s high school, college, and professional.5Youth (North America)[3]Mini (FIBA)[4]685\u2013700\u00a0mm27.0\u201327.6\u00a0in[4]465\u2013495\u00a0g16\u201317\u00a0oz[4]Children ages 9\u201311 years old. This is the standard youth basketball.4Youth (North America)[3]25.5\u00a0in (65\u00a0cm)14\u00a0oz (400\u00a0g)Children ages 5\u20138 years old.3Mini (North America)[3]22.0\u00a0in (56\u00a0cm)10\u00a0oz (280\u00a0g)Children ages 4\u20138 years old. Also known as \u201cmini\u201d basketball.The ball used for all competitions (men's, women's, and mixed) in the formal halfcourt game of 3x3 combines characteristics of the size 6 and size 7 balls. Its circumference is that of a size 6 ball, but its weight is that of a size 7.[5]History[edit]A historic basketball.In early December 1891, the chairman of the physical education department at the School for Christian Workers (Springfield College) in Springfield, Massachusetts, instructed physical education teacher James Naismith to invent a new game to entertain the school's athletes in the winter season. Naismith assembled his class of 18 young men, appointed captains of two nine-player teams, and set in motion the first-ever basketball game, played with a soccer ball and two peach baskets tacked to either end of the gymnasium.The first purpose-built basketballs were made from panels of leather stitched together with a rubber bladder inside. A cloth lining was added to the leather for support and uniformity. A molded version of the early basketball was invented in 1942. For many years, leather was the material of choice for basketball coverings, however, in the late 1990s, synthetic composite materials were put forth and rapidly gained acceptance in most leagues, although the NBA's game balls still use real leather (apart from a brief experiment with a microfiber composite ball in 2006 that was not well received by the players).[6]From 1967 through 1976, the American Basketball Association (ABA) used a distinctive red, white and blue basketball. It is used in the NBA's three point contest.Notable basketball manufacturers[edit]SpaldingSpalding was the first company to produce a basketball for official use. Company founder A. G. Spalding made the first dedicated basketball in the last years of the 19th century at the behest of James Naismith. It has produced basketballs since that time and was the NBA\u2019s official game ball supplier from 1983 to 2021. They also produced the basketballs for the WNBA and NBA G League. The company produces a wide variety of balls for the consumer market.In 2012, it became official provider for both the EuroLeague and EuroCup competitions.[7] It also serves as provider for Liga ACB.Spalding became the supplier for NBL Australia in 2010.[8]MoltenMolten, a Japanese sporting goods manufacturer, has the contract to provide game balls for:[citation needed]All International Basketball Federation (FIBA) world championships and continental qualifying events.All FIBA Asia events.The VTB United League.Many domestic leagues, including Australia, Argentina, Uruguay, France (women), Great Britain, Greece, Indonesia, Italy, Lithuania, the Philippines, Poland, and Portugal.[citation needed]Until the 2006\u201307 season, it provided balls for both Europe-wide competitions organized by Euroleague Basketball, the EuroLeague and ULEB Cup (the EuroCup).[citation needed] Molten's top-of-the line product is the GL7, a leather ball with a distinctive 12-panel design.[9]WilsonWilson Sporting Goods is the official ball supplier of all NCAA postseason tournaments, most notably the men's and women's Division I tournaments, and is used by many NCAA teams during the season as well by many high school leagues. As of 2015, Wilson supplies balls for all FIBA-operated 3x3 competitions.[5] Like Spalding, Wilson produces a variety of balls for the consumer market. It served as the supplier of the NBA's game ball from 1946 to 1983, and again since 2021.RawlingsRawlings has manufactured basketballs since 1902. The company is known for producing a 10-panel ball (the TEN), along with traditional 8-panel balls. The TEN basketball is the official ball of the Amateur Athletic Union and the \"Gus Macker\", the largest 3-on-3 basketball tournament in the United States.[citation needed]NikeNike had the contract to produce balls for the Euroleague Basketball (operators of the EuroLeague and the EuroCup) from 2007[10] until 2012, when it turned to Spalding. In the Philippines the NCAA (unrelated to the American NCAA) and UAAP use the Nike 4005 Official Tournament Balls.NiviaNivia is based in Jalandhar, India and it has been manufacturing basketballs since 1934. It makes hand stitched balls which have been the official balls for many national, international leagues, championship including the All India Football Federation (AIFF).[11]OthersOther companies that make basketballs include Adidas, Baden Sports (official supplier for the Harlem Globetrotters), Dunlop, Tarmak, Mikasa, Mitre, Puma to name a few.See also[edit]List of inflatable manufactured goodsReferences[edit]Wikimedia Commons has media related to Basketball balls.Look up basketball in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.^ Zirm, Jordan (8 September 2016). \"Basketball Sizes: A Quick Guide for All Levels of Play\". STACK. Retrieved 2017-05-05.^ Putman, Carl (September 11, 2017). \"Basketball Official Size & Weight\". LiveStrong.com. Retrieved 2018-02-02.^ a b c d \"Basketball Size Chart - Recommended Sizes for Mom & Me\". www.breakthroughbasketball.com. Retrieved 2017-05-05.^ a b c d e f g h \"Official Basketball Rules 2020 - Basketball Equipment - Valid as of 1st October 2020 (working document)\" (PDF). FIBA. 1 October 2020. p.\u00a012. Retrieved 22 April 2021.^ a b \"Wilson to provide the Official Game Ball for FIBA\" (Press release). Amer Sports. 9 June 2015. Retrieved 17 August 2015.^ Vujcic, Djuka (2006-12-14). \"The New NBA Microfiber Composite Basketball: To Be or Not to Be\". bballcentral.com. Archived from the original on 15 October 2012. Retrieved 2024-02-15.^ Spalding becomes global provider for Euroleague Basketball^ \"Basketball Australia to Play Ball with Spalding Through to 2019\". Basketball Australia. August 10, 2016. Retrieved 2018-02-02.^ \"GL7\". Archived from the original on April 19, 2007.^ \"Euroleague Basketball Announces Partnership with Nike\". Euroleague Basketball. 2007-06-28. Archived from the original on 1 July 2007. Retrieved 2007-07-02.^ \"Nivia Production History\". Archived from the original on 2017-10-23. Retrieved 2020-06-26.vteBasketballGeneral topicsGlossary of termsIndex of articlesLeaguesFIBANBAAAUHistoryJames NaismithProtocol of StockholmVariationsSlamballStreetballOne-on-oneTwenty-oneThree-on-threeSix-on-sixWheelchairRulesJump ballOfficialsTurnoverTrent Tucker RuleViolations3 secondsOffenseDefense5 secondsTime line (8/10 seconds)Basket interferenceCarryingDouble dribbleGoaltendingShot clockTravelingFoulsFlagrantPersonalTechnicalBonusThree-point playFour-point playGame playPositionsSixth manGuardPointShootingComboForwardSmallPowerStretchPointCenterStatisticsPlayer trackingWinning streaksOffensePointField goalThree-pointerReboundAssist50\u201340\u201390 club100-point scorersDefenseBlockStealMovesDribbleCrossoverEuro stepFlopScreenBack screenSlashingShootingFree throwJump shotFadeawayLayupFinger rollSlam dunkPosterizedAlley-oopBackboard shatteringHook shotAir ballBuzzer beaterUncontestedStrategyGeneralPlaybookPracticeShootaroundDrillsMikanTipOffenseBall hogGravityContinuityFlexShuffleUCLA High PostWheelFour cornersPick and rollTriangleMotionPrincetonDribble driveFast breakFlyCherry pickingRun and gunGrinnell SystemNellie BallSmall ballDefenseDouble teamFull-court pressHack-a-ShaqJordan RulesMan-to-manZone1\u20132\u20131\u201311\u20133\u201312\u20133LineMatch-upHybridAmoebaBox-and-oneTriangle-and-twoEquipmentBackboardBallBasketRim (Breakaway rim)CourtGlassHalf courtKeyNetWhistleClothingUniformSleeveFinger sleeveAir JordanChuck Taylor All-StarsMediaList of filmsTrading cards\u00a0Basketball portalOutline of basketballAuthority control databases: National IsraelUnited StatesRetrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Basketball_(ball)&oldid=1219834705\""},{"link": "https://en.wikipedia.org//wiki/Streetball", "content": "Variation of basketballFor the film, see Streetballers. For other ball games played on the street, see Street games.This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources:\u00a0\"Streetball\"\u00a0\u2013\u00a0news\u00a0\u00b7 newspapers\u00a0\u00b7 books\u00a0\u00b7 scholar\u00a0\u00b7 JSTOR (March 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this message)Streetballers at the Venice Beach basketball courts in Los Angeles, California, United States.Streetball (or street basketball) is a variation of basketball, typically played on outdoor courts and featuring significantly less formal structure and enforcement of the game's rules. As such, its format is more conducive to allowing players to publicly showcase their own individual skills. Streetball may also refer to other urban sports played on asphalt.[1]  It is particularly popular and important in New York City and Los Angeles, though its popularity has spread across the United States due to the game's adaptability.[2]Some places and cities in the United States have organized streetball programs, operated similarly to midnight basketball programs. Many cities also host their own weekend-long streetball tournaments, with Hoop-It-Up and the Houston Rockets' Blacktop Battle being two of the most popular. Holcombe Rucker had a big impact on streetball when he created a league in New York City, and it was later dedicated to him and named Rucker Park.[3] Since the mid-2000s, streetball has seen an increase in media exposure through television shows such as ESPN's Street Basketball and City Slam, as well as traveling exhibitions such as the AND1 Mixtape Tour, YPA, and Ball4Real.It is also popular in other countries like Philippines. Most of their streets have their own basketball court. Tournaments are also organized especially during summer and holiday season. Divisions are divided into 4 brackets, Mosquito (ages 7 to 13), Midget (ages 14 to 17), Junior (ages 18 to 25), and Senior division (ages 26 and up). In France, Quai 54 takes place every summer. It is one of the biggest streetball tournaments in the world, showcasing the best of talent in Paris.[4]Rules and features[edit]Children playing streetball in Paris in winter with the Eiffel Tower in the background.Streetball rules vary widely from court to court.Players typically divide into teams by alternating choices. No referees are employed, so almost invariably a \"call your own foul\" rule is in effect,[5] and a player who believes he has been fouled, simply needs to call out \"Foul!\", and play will be stopped, with the ball awarded to the fouled player's team (free throws are not usually awarded in street ball[5]), usually after a brief debate over the alleged foul.Calling fouls is generally disfavored.[5] The etiquette of what rightly constitutes a foul, as well as the permissible amount of protestation against such a call, are the products of individual groups, and of the seriousness of a particular game.Other violations which are enforced include traveling, double-dribble, carrying, kicking, out of bounds, goaltending and backcourt violation.Half-court play[edit]Main article: 3x3 basketballThe majority of streetball games are played 3-on-3 on a half court. Special rules have been developed for half-court play:At the beginning of the game and after each made basket, play begins at the top of the key. A \"checking\" system is used to ensure that both teams are ready to begin play. This involves the offensive player saying \"check\" while throwing the ball to his defender. The defender then makes sure their team is ready and then throws the ball back to begin play.If the ball goes out of bounds during play, the ball can either be checked from out of bounds near where the ball went out or at the top of the key, depending on the rules established before the game.FIBA recently had to add the \"check clock\" rule into play in their streetball tournaments due to some players taking excruciatingly long amounts of time to check the ball, interrupting the flow of play. This \"check clock\"  means that when the defending player has been checked the ball, he has to return it within 5 seconds.The \"12-second shot clock\" rule can be implemented as well to prevent longer possessions. (used in streetball tournaments)If the defending team gains possession of the ball, they must \"clear\" the ball past the three-point line before they can score a basket. This does not need to be at the top of the key and no checking is required.Sometimes in a half-court game, a \"winner's ball\" or \"make it, take it\" rule is used. This means that when a team scores, they get the ball back on offense. Potentially, the other team could end up never getting the ball on offense if the first team scores on every possession.Game structure[edit]A common feature of street basketball is the pick up game. To participate in most streetball games around the world, one simply goes to an outdoor court where people are playing, indicates a wish to participate, and from all the players who were at the court before one has played, two players acting as \"captains\" will get to pick their team out of the players available and play a game. Generally, the team captains alternate their choices, but different courts have differing rules in regards to player selection. Many games play up to 7, 11, 13, 15, or 21 points with the scoring system of 2-point baskets and 3-point baskets counting for 1 and 2 points respectively. It is possible to do (1's only), (2's only), (1's and 2's) or (2's and 3's). Players often play \"win by 1\" or \"win by 2\" as in tennis to win the game.1's only \u2013 each basket counts as 1 point2's only \u2013 each basket counts as 2 points1's and 2's \u2013 each basket counts as 1 point inside the arc and 2 points outside the arc2's and 3's \u2013 each basket counts as 2 points inside the arc and 3 points outside the arcThe streetball game can be played at different team formats such as 2-on-2 or 3-on-3 for a half court play while 4-on-4 or 5-on-5 for a full court play. In most instances, the winning team gets first possession and usually choose which direction (which basket) they get to use.In a 3-on-3 or higher, the first game often plays up to 15 points. Second game then goes to 12, then every game after is 15.Another possible streetball feature is having an MC call the game. The MC is on the court during the game and is often very close to the players (but makes an effort to not interfere with the game) and uses a microphone to provide game commentary for the fans.One-on-one play[edit]Giannis and Thanasis Antetokounmpo playing street basketball at a local court in Sepolia, Athens, in 2015Special rules have been developed for one-on-one play: (#5)If the player loses the match of a one-on-one, the losing player is given a second chance for overtime. This either results with the match continuing or if the match is close enough the next person to go up by 2 points wins.In a game of One-on-One at a close game, the game cannot end on a bank shot. If a bank shot happens on the last point of the game it is a replay of possession. (refer as the no bankshot rule)Another additional variation to the rules is the (skunk rule). This merely means that if a player reaches a certain point without the other player scoring then the game is over. The skunk rule limit can vary, but is often used at the score 7 to 0 mark.A local dead end limit rule can be apply; for instance a game may be played to 7, win by 2, with a 9-point dead end, (refer to as 7 by 2's, 9 straight) which would mean scores of 7\u20133, 8\u20136, or 9\u20138 would all be final, while with scores of 7\u20136 or 8\u20137, play would continue.Sometimes in a One-on-One game, a (\"winner's ball\" or \"make it, take it\" rule) is used. This means that if a player scores will gets the ball again on offense; the other player could end up never getting the ball on offense if that other player scores on every possession.Variations[edit]21[edit]A popular variation of street basketball is 21, also known as  Hustle, American, St. Mary's, V or Varsity, Roughhouse, 33, 50 or Crunch, or \"New York.\" 21 is played most often with 3\u20135 players on a half court. However it is possible to play \"21\" with only two players or more.Further, in some forms, players can freely enter the game after it has begun, starting at zero points or being \"spotted\" the same number as the player with the lowest score. \"21\" is an \"every player for himself\" game, with highly variable rules. The rules of \"21\" are usually agreed by the players at the beginning of the game.The typical rules of \"21\" are:one player \"breaks\" to begin the game by shooting from 3 point range. Sometimes players agree that the \"break\" must not be a successful shot, in order to give every player an equal chance at rebounding to gain the 1st possession of the gamethe normal foul rule is in effectbaskets are scored as 2 points (short/med range) and 3 points (long range)after a successful shot, the shooter can take up to three 1-point free-throws (or play the \"shoot til you miss\" rule, where the shooter continues to shoot the ball until a player misses), but as soon as he misses, the ball may be rebounded by anyone; conversely, if he makes all three free throw shots, he then gets to keep the ball and \"check up\" or start play again at the top of the arcIn some games, 1 point free throws start at the charity stripe and then move to the 3 point line at the score of 11 and so on. (referred as the \"long all day\" rule)the last person with a shot attempt should be the first person to step out on defenseafter any change of possession, the ball should be cleared past the 3 point line (or at times just out of the key)in order to win, a player must make exactly 21 points; if he goes over then he restarts back at either 11, 13 or 15 points, depending on the rules in usewhoever wins the game starts with the ball at the beginning of the next gameonly serious fouls are called (commonly referred to as \"No blood, No foul\")other typical basketball rules, such as out-of-bounds, are also frequently ignored in the game \"21\"; this is to avoid confusion on possession of the ballCommon additional rules include:if a missed shot is tipped in to the basket by another player without their feet touching the ground, then the shooter's score reverts to 0 (or 13, if their score was over 13); this rule may not apply on free-throws. (This is referred to as playing with \u201ctips\u201d or \u201ctaps\u201d)if a player who has 13 points misses their next shot, regardless of whether it is a free-throw, then their points revert to 0.  (This is referred to as poison points)whoever wins the game must shoot a three-pointer in order to start with the ball at the beginning of the next game; if he makes it, he gets the three points, but doesn't have to take free-throws, and starts with the ball.players with less than 13 points at the end of a game keep their points into the next game using the (handicap system) for when there is a wide variation in skill amongst the players.\"21\" is considered a very challenging game, especially because the offensive player must possibly  go up against several defenders at the same time. For this reason, it is exceedingly difficult to \"drive to the hole\" and make lay-ups in \"21.\" Therefore, and also because of the emphasis on free-throws, \"21\" is very much a shooter's game, and because a successful shot means you keep the ball, it is possible for there to be come-backs when a player recovers from a large deficit by not missing any shots (this can also result in failure when they miss their final free-throw at 20 points and revert to 13 or 15). \"21\" is popular because it allows an odd number of people to play, unlike regular basketball or other variants.H-O-R-S-E[edit]Main article: H-O-R-S-EThe game of H-O-R-S-E is played by two or more players. The order of turns is established before the game starts. The player whose turn is first is given control, which means they must attempt to make a basket in a particular way of their choosing, explaining to the other players beforehand what the requirements of the shot are. If that player is successful, every subsequent player must attempt that same shot according to its requirements. If a player fails to duplicate the shot, they acquire a letter, starting with H and moving rightward through the word \"Horse\". After all players have made an attempt, control moves to the next player, and the game continues on in this fashion. If a player who has control misses their shot, there is no letter penalty and control moves to the next player. Whenever any player has all of the letters, they are eliminated from the game. The last person in the game is declared the winner.Other variations of basketball[edit]Main article: Variations of basketball \u00a7\u00a0ActivitiesNotable streetballers[edit]This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (January 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this message)Rafer \"Skip to my Lou\" AlstonKenny Brunner aka Bad SantaSylvester \"Sy\" BlyeEmmanuel \"Hard Work\" BibbGrayson \"The Professor\" BoucherCardell \"Ballaholic\" ButlerKevin \"Bizzness\" ButlerPhilip Champion aka Hot Sauce/SizzleRoberto Cordani aka IceCreamLloyd \"Swee' Pea\" DanielsJamar \"The Pharmacist\" DavisWaliyy \"Main Event\" DixonBrandon \"The Assassin\" DurhamTaurian \"Mr. 720\" FontenetteBobbito Garc\u00edaJoe Hammond (basketball)Connie \"The Hawk\" HawkinsJoey \"King Handles\" HaywoodDeshun \"Father Time\" JacksonJumpin Jackie JacksonTroy \"Escalade\" JacksonShamel JonesRichard \"Pee Wee\" KirklandRaymond LewisEarl \"The Goat\" ManigaultRobert \"50\" MartinDemetrius \"Hook\" MitchellMalloy Nesmith Sr.Aaron \"AO\" OwensDarren \"Primal Fear\" PhillipKareem \"The Best Kept Secret\" ReidJack \"Black Jack\" RyanWilliam Sanders (basketball)Adam Sandler, actor and comedian[6][7]Ed \"Booger\" SmithJohn \"The Franchise\" StricklandAdrian WaltonJames Pookie WilsonCorey \"Homicide\" WilliamsLarry \"Bone Collector\" WilliamsJames Speedy WilliamsStreetball in popular media[edit]See also: Rucker ParkFilms and TV programs[edit]Above the RimAmerican History XCity Slam, a television program broadcast on ESPNCrossoverHe Got GameLike Mike 2: StreetballUncle DrewWhite Men Can't JumpHustleVideo games[edit]AND 1 Streetball, video game by Ubisoft (2006)FreeStyle Street Basketball, an online PC game by JC EntertainmentNBA Ballers, video game by Midway (2004-2007)sequels to NBA Ballers: NBA Ballers: Rebound, NBA Ballers: Phenom, and NBA Ballers: Chosen OneNBA Street, video game series by EA Sports (2001-2007)Street Hoops, video game by Activision (2002)Street Slam, video game by Data East (1994)See also[edit]3x3 (basketball)Similar variations of other sports in the US[edit]Street football (American football)Street soccerReferences[edit]^ \"Streetball - InsideHoops.com\". www.insidehoops.com. Archived from the original on 2012-01-01. Retrieved 2017-12-19.^ \"A Complete Guide to Crushing It at NYC Streetball\". Complex. Archived from the original on 2023-04-17. Retrieved 2017-12-19.^ \"Holcombe Rucker Park\". blogs.shu.edu. 27 April 2020. Archived from the original on 2022-02-17. Retrieved 2022-02-17.^ Bobb, Maurice (2014-07-10). \"French, Fly: Inside Quai 54, the World's Baddest Streetball Tournament\". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 2022-02-17. Retrieved 2022-02-17.^ a b c Hickey, Pat (January 4, 2019). \"Evansville basketball's K.J. Riley among the nation's leaders in drawing fouls\". Evansville Courier & Press. Evansville, Indiana. Retrieved April 13, 2024.^ \"This man is a pickup basketball god\". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 2021-09-08. Retrieved 2021-09-08.^ \"Adam Sandler keeps getting spotted hooping around Philly\". NBC Sports. 3 September 2021. Archived from the original on 8 September 2021. Retrieved 8 September 2021.External links[edit]Wikimedia Commons has media related to Streetball.Streetball.com Global Basketball CommunityStreetball.ca Canada based streetball/events websiteStreetball Europe 1st all European Streetball tournamentAustralian Streetball 3N3 League 1st 3on3 Streetball League in AustraliaVariations of basketball The game of H.O.R.S.Ehttps://www.wikihow.com/Play-Streetball Archived 2007-10-17 at the Wayback MachinevteBasketballGeneral topicsGlossary of termsIndex of articlesLeaguesFIBANBAAAUHistoryJames NaismithProtocol of StockholmVariationsSlamballStreetballOne-on-oneTwenty-oneThree-on-threeSix-on-sixWheelchairRulesJump ballOfficialsTurnoverTrent Tucker RuleViolations3 secondsOffenseDefense5 secondsTime line (8/10 seconds)Basket interferenceCarryingDouble dribbleGoaltendingShot clockTravelingFoulsFlagrantPersonalTechnicalBonusThree-point playFour-point playGame playPositionsSixth manGuardPointShootingComboForwardSmallPowerStretchPointCenterStatisticsPlayer trackingWinning streaksOffensePointField goalThree-pointerReboundAssist50\u201340\u201390 club100-point scorersDefenseBlockStealMovesDribbleCrossoverEuro stepFlopScreenBack screenSlashingShootingFree throwJump shotFadeawayLayupFinger rollSlam dunkPosterizedAlley-oopBackboard shatteringHook shotAir ballBuzzer beaterUncontestedStrategyGeneralPlaybookPracticeShootaroundDrillsMikanTipOffenseBall hogGravityContinuityFlexShuffleUCLA High PostWheelFour cornersPick and rollTriangleMotionPrincetonDribble driveFast breakFlyCherry pickingRun and gunGrinnell SystemNellie BallSmall ballDefenseDouble teamFull-court pressHack-a-ShaqJordan RulesMan-to-manZone1\u20132\u20131\u201311\u20133\u201312\u20133LineMatch-upHybridAmoebaBox-and-oneTriangle-and-twoEquipmentBackboardBallBasketRim (Breakaway rim)CourtGlassHalf courtKeyNetWhistleClothingUniformSleeveFinger sleeveAir JordanChuck Taylor All-StarsMediaList of filmsTrading cards\u00a0Basketball portalOutline of basketballvteContemporary African-American cultureFashion and styleAfrican American EnglishAfrican American hairSaggingCrunkGrillsSneaker collectingStreetballCrip WalkDreadlocksTelevision, film and musicAfrican American filmsBETBlack sitcomsReality TVBounce TVHood filmRevoltOprah Winfrey NetworkEventsBlack Reel AwardsAmerican Black Film FestivalBET AwardsHair WarsUrban Beach WeekBlack Bike WeekSoul Train Music AwardsCultural and population centresAtlantaMemphisDetroitSouth Side, ChicagoHarlemNew OrleansWashington, D.C.South Los AngelesHoustonBaton RougePhiladelphiaBaltimoreDallasSt. LouisMilwaukeeJacksonBirminghamMiamiClevelandBostonDenverOmahaRaleighNew York CitySouthern United StatesCities and neighborhoods:Cities with large African American populationsCommunities with African American majority populationsConcepts and slangBling-blingGood hairCPTBaby mamaDown-lowStop Snitchin'Acting whitePurple drankThe DozensThrow shadeSocial issuesRacial profiling (Driving While Black)Police brutalityGangsTobacco marketing and African AmericansCrack cocaine epidemic McDonald's advertisingAuthority control databases: National Czech RepublicRetrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Streetball&oldid=1218710342\""},{"link": "https://en.wikipedia.org//wiki/Glossary_of_basketball", "content": "List of definitions of terms and concepts related to the game of basketballThis article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources:\u00a0\"Glossary of basketball terms\"\u00a0\u2013\u00a0news\u00a0\u00b7 newspapers\u00a0\u00b7 books\u00a0\u00b7 scholar\u00a0\u00b7 JSTOR (October 2010) (Learn how and when to remove this message)Most important terms related to the basketball courtThis glossary of basketball terms is a list of definitions of terms used in the game of basketball. Like any other major sport, basketball features its own extensive vocabulary of unique words and phrases used by players, coaches, sports journalists, commentators, and fans.Contents0\u20139ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ References0\u20139[edit]2-for-1A strategy used within the last minute of a period or quarter, in which the team with possession times its shot to ensure that it will regain possession with enough time to shoot again before time runs out. Applicable in competitions that use a shot clock (all except NFHS in most US states).[1]3-and-DAny player, typically not a star, who specializes mainly in three-point shooting (\"3\") and defense (\"D\"). The term is most often used in the NBA, where this specific skill set has been increasingly valued in the 21st century.[2][3]3x3A formalized version of a half-court basketball game with three players on each team, officially sanctioned by FIBA. This variant made its Olympic debut in 2021 (delayed from 2020).three seconds ruleA rule which requires that a player shall not remain in the opponent's restricted area for more than three consecutive seconds while the player's team is in control of a live ball in the frontcourt and the game clock is running.[4]n-possession gameA way of expressing the number of times a team that is trailing its opponent late in the game must secure possession of the ball and score without allowing the opponent to do the same in order to tie or overtake the opponent. Normally, three points are the most possible in any given possession; therefore, the number of possessions (n) necessary is equal to the point margin, divided by three, rounded up to the nearest integer. For instance, a team down by 7 points would be in a three-possession game.A[edit]advance stepA step in which the defender's lead foot steps toward his man and the back foot slides forward.air ballAn unblocked shot that fails to hit the rim or backboard.alley-oopAn offensive play in which a player throws the ball up near the basket to a teammate (or, more rarely, to themself) who then jumps, catches the ball in mid-air, and immediately scores a basket, often with a slam dunk.alternating possessionIn many rulesets, most notably FIBA, NCAA, and NFHS (U.S. high school), a rule used to settle most or all jump ball situations after the opening tipoff. In jump ball situations, or at the start of a new period of play, possession is awarded to the team whose offense is moving in the direction of the possession arrow.amoeba defenseA defensive strategy incorporating elements of both man-to-man and zone defenses (see article for more details).and-oneA free throw awarded to a shooter who is fouled while scoring, especially one which is made.Asociaci\u00f3n de Clubes de Baloncesto (ACB)The top professional basketball league in Spain, often regarded as the second-strongest domestic league in the world, behind the NBA.assistA pass to a teammate who scores a basket immediately or after one dribble. Compare with secondary assist, also known as hockey assist, and contrast with screen assist.B[edit]backdoor cutAn offensive play in which a player on the perimeter steps away from the basket, drawing the defender along, then suddenly cuts to the basket behind the defender for a pass.ball hogA player who frequently chooses not to pass the ball to their teammates, especially one who eschews sharing the ball in order to attempt difficult shots.backboardA flat, rigid, vertical board situated behind the rim of the basket and to which the basket is attached. Regulation backboards are made of plexiglass or tempered glass and are rectangular in shape, 6 feet (180\u00a0cm) wide by 3.5 feet (110\u00a0cm) tall, with a 24-by-18-inch (61 by 46\u00a0cm) rectangle marked on the glass immediately above the basket.backcourt1.\u00a0\u00a0The half of the court a particular team is defending. Contrast frontcourt.2.\u00a0\u00a0A team's guards.backcourt violation1.\u00a0\u00a0Touching the ball in the backcourt after it has entered the frontcourt and was not last touched by the other team.2.\u00a0\u00a0Failure to bring the ball from the backcourt into the frontcourt within the allotted time of 8 seconds in the NBA or FIBA (previously 10) and 10 seconds in NCAA play for both men and women.back screenAn offensive play in which a player comes from the low post to set a screen for a player on the perimeter.ball fakeAlso called a pass fake.A sudden movement by the player with the ball intended to cause the defender to move in one direction, allowing the passer to pass in another direction.ball reversalThe passing of the ball from one side of the court to the other.ball screenAn offensive play in which a player sets a screen on the defender guarding the player with the ball.ball sideAlso called the strong side.The half of the court (divided lengthwise) that the ball is currently on. Contrast help side.banana cutAlso called a \"C\" cut.A wide, curving cut, as opposed to a cut that is a straight line.bank shotA shot that hits the backboard before hitting the rim or going through the net.baseball passPassing the basketball using an overhand throw with one hand similar to a baseball pitch.baselineAlso called the end line.The line that marks the playing boundary at either end of the court.baseline out-of-bounds playThe play used to return the ball to the court from outside the baseline along the opponent's basket.basketUsed interchangeably with goal, hoop, and net.The goal in the game of basketball, consisting of a net suspended from a hoop 18 inches (46\u00a0cm) in diameter and 10 ft (305 cm) above the ground. In regulation contexts it is attached to a backboard.basket cutA cut toward the basket.basket interferencethe violation of touching the ball or the basket while the ball is on the rim; touching the ball when it is within the cylinder extending upwards from the rim; reaching up through the basket from below and touching the ball; or pulling down on the rim of the basket so that it contacts the ball before returning to its original position, or during a shot attempt.[5][6]BEEF (Balance, Eyes, Elbow, Follow Through)A mnemonic used to teach proper shooting form.bench1.\u00a0\u00a0Substitute players sitting on the sideline.The actual bench or chairs these players sit on.benchwarmerA player who does not play and instead sits on the bench for most if not all of a game or season.bid thiefIn U.S. college basketball, especially NCAA Division I, a team that (1) is a member of a conference with at least one team that is virtually certain to receive a bid to the men's or women's championship tournament, as applicable, regardless of performance in the conference tournament; (2) is not viewed as a viable candidate for an at-large tournament bid; but (3) nevertheless wins its conference tournament, forcing the more powerful conference member(s) into the at-large pool and thus \"stealing\" a bid from a team (not necessarily in that conference) that otherwise would be a credible candidate for an at-large bid.[7]big man/womanOften shortened to big.Any low post player who is physically large relative to other players, especially one who plays the position of center or power forward.[8]blindside screenA screen set directly behind a defender where the player cannot see it.block1.\u00a0\u00a0To tip or deflect a shooter's shot, altering its flight so that the shot misses.2.\u00a0\u00a0A violation in which a defender steps in front of a dribbler but is still moving when they collide; also called a blocking foul.3.\u00a0\u00a0The small painted square on the floor next to the basket just outside the lane.block-charge arcThe painted line near the basket which marks the boundary of the restricted area (definition 2).block outAlso box out.To maintain a better rebounding position than an opposing player by widening your stance and arms and using your body as a barrier.boardAnother name for a rebound.bonusUnder NCAA men's rules, a team is \"in the bonus\" when the opposing team has accumulated seven, eight, or nine team fouls in a half, and therefore gains a one and one opportunity on each non-shooting foul. The opposing team is described as \"over the limit\". Under FIBA, NCAA women's, and (from 2023\u201324) NFHS rules, the bonus takes effect on the fifth team foul in a quarter and the \"one and one\" no longer exists; all subsequent non-shooting fouls result in two free throws. In the NCAA rule book, free throws in this situation are officially called bonus free throws. See also double bonus and penalty.bounce passA pass that bounces once before reaching the receiver.box-and-oneA combination defense in which four defenders play zone in a box formation and the fifth defender guards one player man-to-man.box outSee block out.box setA formation in which four players align themselves as the four corners of a box. Often used for baseline out-of-bounds plays.breakaway rima rim that contains a hinge and a spring so it can bend downward when a player dunks a basketball, and then snaps back into a horizontal position when the player releases it.brickA shot attempt that hits the rim and bounces off without hitting the backboard or going in the basket.bricklayerA player who repeatedly shoots bricks.bubbleAn imaginary boundary separating teams expected to receive berths in a postseason tournament from those left out of said event. Though applicable in any competition in which the number of teams playing in the postseason is less than the total number of teams competing, it is most commonly used in reference to the NCAA Division I men's and women's championship tournaments.[7]bump the cutterTo step in the way of a player who is trying to cut to the ball for a pass.buzzer beaterA basket that is scored in the final seconds of a game (right before the buzzer sounds), especially one which results in a win or a tie that leads to overtime play.C[edit]carryingAlso called palming.A violation in formal play which occurs when an offensive player holds the ball excessively at the ball's apex while dribbling. In formal play, this penalty is considered either a \"carry\" or a double dribble.center (C)One of three standard player positions or five total positions in the game of basketball. Centers are generally the tallest players on the floor, responsible mainly for scoring, rebounding, and defense near the basket.chargeAn offensive foul which occurs when a player with the ball rushes into a non-moving defender.charity stripeAnother name for the free-throw line.cherry pickingA strategy whereby one player (the cherry picker) decides not to play defense and instead stays near their opponent's goal, with the primary objective being to receive the ball from their teammates for easier points.chest passA pass that is made from one player to another player's chest, especially by forcefully pushing the ball away from the chest with both hands.chuckerA player who takes frequent, and often imprudent, shot attempts.[9] The term was popularized by the television series Seinfeld.[10] See also gunner.circus shotA low-percentage shot, generally from close range, taken while the shooter is off balance, falling, facing away from the basket or otherwise out of control. Successful circus shots require exceptional luck.[11]clear-path foulA foul which occurs when a defender fouls an opponent when the opponent has nobody in front of them. The foul results in two free throws and possession. Contrast with Euro foul.combo forwardA player with the skills or qualities of both a small forward and a power forward.[12]cornermanSee forward.[13]crossoverA dribble from one hand to the ground to the other hand, accompanied by a change in direction.D[edit]daggerAlso called a dagger shot.A made shot, sometimes a three-pointer, in a pivotal part of the game; e.g. a shot that silences a rowdy crowd, puts the team ahead in the closing moments of a game, discourages the opposing team, or kills their confidence.dead-ball reboundA rebound that is not credited to either team, such as a rebound that (technically) occurs after a miss on the first free throw of a two-shot foul. It ensures that every missed shot has a corresponding rebound, and was introduced for the purposes of box score statistical error detection.[14]dimeSee drop a dime.dishAnother name for an assist.disqualifying foulIn FIBA and NCAA women's rules, an especially egregious foul, almost always involving violence or other excessive physical contact, that is punished by immediate ejection; equivalent to the NBA's flagrant-2.DNP-CDStands for \"did not play - coach's decision\". It refers to cases where a player was available to play in a game but did not play. It does not refer to cases where a player missed the game due to injury or suspension.[15] Additionally, it does not always mean a player is being punished by the coach. Some end of the bench players may be a DNP-CD for many games during the season.double bonusIn NCAA men's rules, a team is \"in the double bonus\" when the opposing team has accumulated 10 or more team fouls in a half, and therefore earns two free throws on each subsequent non-shooting foul committed by the defense. It had previously been part of the NCAA women's and NFHS rule sets, but the NCAA eliminated it from women's play in 2015\u201316 and NFHS followed suit for 2023\u201324. The term \"double bonus\" is widely used by the media and fans, but does not appear in any official rule book. See also bonus and penalty.double-doubleDouble-digit figures in two positive statistical categories, especially when achieved by an individual player (e.g. 12 points and 14 rebounds).double dribbleTo dribble the ball with two hands at the same time, or to dribble, stop, and then begin to dribble again. Either act is a violation of the rules and results in a loss of possession.double nickelTo accumulate 55 points.down screenWhen an offensive player runs to the baseline closest to their goal to set a screen.downtownWell beyond the three-point line.dribble drive motionAn offense that spreads players to open up the lane for a driving player to make a layup or kick out for a three-pointer.dribbleTo bounce the ball continuously with one hand. Dribbling is required in order to take steps while in possession of the ball; failing to do so properly is a violation of the rules in all rulesets used in the game.drop a dimeTo make an assist.drop stepA post-up move where the ballhandler picks up their dribble and at the same time extends a leg back on one side of their defender, and then turns toward the basket, using that leg as leverage to get between their defender and the basket.dunkAlso called a slam dunk.1.\u00a0\u00a0To score by putting the ball directly through the basket with one or both hands, i.e. without shooting by letting the ball travel through the air.2.\u00a0\u00a0Any shot made by dunking.E[edit]Elam EndingA method of ending basketball games by reaching a specified target score, devised by Ball State University professor Nick Elam and currently used in The Basketball Tournament, the NBA All-Star Game, the Canadian Elite Basketball League, and the NBA G League. In the TBT implementation, upon the first dead ball on or after the 4:00 mark in the final quarter, 8 points (originally 7, but changed for the 2019 edition) are added to the score of the leading team, which becomes the target score. The game then continues without a game clock but with the shot clock, and the first team to reach or exceed the target score wins.[16] In the NBA ASG implementation, the first three quarters proceed normally. Then, the target score is set by adding 24 points to the score of the leading team, and the game continues as in the TBT implementation. The CEBL implements the Elam Ending at the same point as in TBT, but adds 9 points to set the target score; additionally, if the dead-ball situation that triggers the Elam Ending results in free throws for either team, the free throws are taken under dead-ball conditions before the target score is set.[17] Starting with the 2022\u201323 season, the G League uses the Elam Ending in two situations. First, in all regular-season games, overtime is played under Elam Ending conditions, with the target score set by adding 7 points to the tied teams' score at the end of regulation. Second, games in the G League Showcase, a special event held in December, operate identically to the NBA ASG, except that the target score is set by adding 25 points instead of 24.[18]elbow1.\u00a0\u00a0An actual or attempted strike of another player with one's elbow. Especially violent examples are typically called as flagrant fouls.2.\u00a0\u00a0The court area where the free-throw line meets the side of the three-second lane.end of quarterWhen a quarter ends.EnglishSidespin applied to the basketball by a player shooting a layup. Analogy taken from the cue sports term.Euro foulA foul committed by a defender who is between the opponent and the defending team's basket in the early phase of a fast break, with the intent of stopping play.[19][20] Contrast with clear-path foul.Euro stepA move in which an offensive player picks up their dribble, takes a step in one direction, and then quickly takes a second step in another direction.EuroBasketA European international basketball tournament, held every two years for both men and women; analogous to the men's UEFA European Championship and UEFA Women's Championship.EuroCupEurope's second-level transnational club competition, operated by Euroleague Basketball; analogous to the UEFA Europa League in association football.EuroLeagueEurope's top transnational club competition, also operated by Euroleague Basketball; analogous to the UEFA Champions League in association football.F[edit]fadeawayA fadeaway or fall-away in basketball is a jump shot taken while jumping backwards, away from the basket but still facing it. The goal is to create space between the shooter and the defender, making the shot much harder to block.fast breakAn offensive tactic in which a team attempts to advance the ball and score as quickly as possible, giving the other team no time to defend effectively. Often the result of a steal or blocked shot. See also secondary break.FIBAThe International Basketball Federation, known as FIBA from its French name F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale de Basketball. An association of national organizations which governs international competitions.FIBA 33The original name of what is now called 3x3.field goalA shot made or attempted from anywhere on the court (including layups and dunks but not including free throws).finger rollA specialized type of layup shot where the ball is rolled off the tips of the player's fingers using the momentum of the jump. The advantage of the finger roll is that the ball can travel in a higher arc over a defender that might otherwise block the shot.flagrant foulAn unsportsmanlike foul in which there is no serious attempt to play the ball. The NBA classifies these types of fouls as flagrant-1 and flagrant-2; NFHS (high school) uses flagrant personal foul and flagrant technical foul; NCAA men's basketball uses both sets of terms interchangeably; and FIBA and NCAA women's basketball instead use unsportsmanlike foul and disqualifying foul (which roughly correspond to the two North American subcategories). At all North American levels, the latter type of foul results in the immediate ejection of the offender.floaterA shot in which the ball is released with an extremely high arc in order to prevent taller defenders from blocking the shot. It is typically utilized by smaller guards.flopA deliberate or exaggerated fall by a player after little or no physical contact from an opponent, with the goal of drawing a personal foul call against the opponent.forward (F)One of three standard player positions or five total positions in the game of basketball. Forwards are primarily responsible for scoring and rebounding. See small forward and power forward. An individual capable of playing both types of forward is often called a stretch four.foulA violation of the rules other than a floor violation, generally one which attempts to gain advantage by physical contact. Such violations are penalized by a change in possession or the awarding of free-throw opportunities. There are many different types of fouls; see personal foul, technical foul, flagrant foul, unsportsmanlike foul, and disqualifying foul.foul inSee and-one.four-point playA rare play in which a player is fouled while making a three-point field goal and then makes the resulting free throw, thereby scoring a total of four points.free throwAn unopposed attempt to score a basket, worth one point, from the free-throw line. Generally, two attempts are awarded when the player is fouled in the act of shooting (three attempts are awarded in the case of a three-point shot), fouled flagrantly, or when the opposing team fouls while over the foul limit. For technical fouls, FIBA rules award one free throw; NBA and NFHS rules award two free throws; and NCAA rules award either one or two free throws, depending on the specific type of technical foul. In 3x3 rules, where regular baskets are worth 1\u00a0point and shots from behind the arc are worth 2\u00a0points, one attempt is normally awarded; two attempts are awarded when a player is fouled on a missed shot from behind the arc, the opposing team has committed more than six fouls in a game, and on any technical foul.free-throw lineAlso called the stripe or charity stripe.The line from which free throws are made.G[edit]get backTo retreat back across the half-court line after either a made or missed shot attempt. Usually called out by players or coaches to let the team know to hustle back and set up on defense.goaltendingThe violation of interfering with the ball while it is on its way to the basket and it is in a downward flight, above the basket ring and within the imaginary cylinder, and/or not touching the rim.granny shotAn underhand shot. Can describe a shot taken using only one hand, usually thrown by older women, or one using both hands, most notably used by Rick Barry for free throws.gravityDescription of situations in which players off the ball draw defenders to them, based on their established shooting ability. Such a player is said to have gravity on offense.Grinnell SystemA combined offensive and defensive system created by David Arseneault, head coach at Grinnell College. A variation of the run-and-gun style, its most unusual feature is that entire five-player units are usually substituted every 45 to 90 seconds, as in an ice hockey shift.guard (G)One of three standard player positions or five total positions in the game of basketball. Guards are typically classified in two broad categories: point guards have strong ballhandling and passing skills and are typically used to run the offense, while shooting guards, as the name implies, are generally the team's best shooters and are very often the leading scorers on their teams. Some players, often referred to as combo guards, combine features of both types.gunnerSomeone who shoots the ball too many times. See also chucker.H[edit]half-court offenseThe portion of a team's offensive play conducted with both teams having established positions. See also transition offense.halftime1.\u00a0\u00a0The end of the first half of play.2.\u00a0\u00a0The interval between the two halves of a game.hand-check foulA kind of foul wherein a player used their hands illegally to impede or slow the movement of the opponent.hang timeThe time a player spends in the air from the liftoff of a jump to the landing of the jump.heating upWhen a player starts to make the majority of their shots and takes over the game.held ballA situation when players from both teams claim possession of the basketball at the same time without a foul from either team. Depending on the league and the game situation, may result in a jump ball, a change in possession, or an out-of-bounds play by the team that previously had possession.high postThe area of the court at the top of the key on either end of the free throw line.hockey assistSee secondary assist.hook shotA shot attempt make with a single hand swinging in an arc over the head or shoulders while in motion. Contrast with a regular shot normally taken facing the baskethoopAnother name for the basket.I[edit]I got backTo be in the back of the court ready to block or shoot.in-n-out1.\u00a0\u00a0A shot that appears to be going in, but instead goes back out.2.\u00a0\u00a0A dribble move where the offensive player dribbles in an inward motion then backs out to fake out a defender.index ratingSee Performance Index Rating.intentional foulTo deliberately foul an opposing player to either stop the clock and/or to get possession of the ball after free throw attempts. A common strategy toward the end of the first half or the end of the game.isolation Also iso.[21]An offensive tactic where the ballhandler moves to one side of the court while all the other offensive players move to the far side. The offense seeks to create a favorable one-on-one matchup for the isolated ballhandler, or else to draw a double-team that may create an open shot for a teammate.J[edit]jump shotSometimes abbreviated as J.Also called a jumper.An overhead shot taken while jumping.[22]jump ballThe jump ball is what starts every basketball game, except in 3x3. Takes place in the center of the court.K[edit]keyThe free-throw lane and free-throw circle together (originally, the lane was narrower than the circle's diameter, giving the area the appearance of a skeleton key hole).kickingA violation called when a player intentionally uses their foot or leg to contact the ball. Play is stopped and the ball is given to the non-violating team to inbound.kickoutA pass from the paint area to a shooter outside the three-point arc.L[edit]laneThe free-throw lane.lay-inA close-range shot using one hand to tip the ball over the rim of the basket.layupA close-range shot using one hand to bank the ball off the backboard and into the basket.ledgieWhen a ball gets stuck on the ledge at the back of the rim of the basket.logo threeA three-point field goal attempted from or near the mid-court center circle, on which the logo of the home team, venue, league, or event is usually placed. Also referred to as \"from the logo.\"[23][24]loose ball foulTo foul an opposing player when neither team has control of the ball. As an example, fouling an opposing player when both players are chasing a loose balllow postThe area of the court around the basket on either side of the bottom of the key.M[edit]man-to-man defenseA defense in which each player guards a single opposing player. Contrast zone defense.Memphis AttackAnother name for the dribble drive motion. The offense was popularized in the early 2000s at the University of Memphis under head coach John Calipari.mid-rangeDescribes a shot taken from outside the paint but inside the three-point line.motion offenseOffense created through a series of cuts and screens to create the best possible shot, with most or all offensive players moving simultaneously.moving violationAnother name for a traveling violation.N[edit]National Basketball Association (NBA)The largest men's professional basketball league in the United States and Canada.National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA)The primary governing body for intercollegiate sports in the United States. The NCAA organizes annual national championship tournaments for all three of its competitive divisions in college basketball, with the Division I men's and women's tournaments being by far the most followed.National Federation of State High School Associations (NFHS)The governing body that sets rules for high school sports in the U.S., including basketball.National Invitation Tournament (NIT)An annual postseason tournament for NCAA Division I men's basketball teams that do not qualify for the NCAA championship tournament. Founded in 1938, a year before the NCAA tournament, it is closely identified with New York City; all games were originally held at the third Madison Square Garden, and the semifinals and final were held at today's Madison Square Garden through 2022. In its early years, it was considered more prestigious than the NCAA tournament, but this changed starting in the 1950s. The tournament has been directly operated by the NCAA since 2006.NBA G LeagueAlso called the G League. Originally the National Basketball Development League or NBDL; later the NBA Development League or D-League.The NBA's official minor league.NCAA Evaluation Tool (NET)A metric developed by the NCAA for use in the selection process for the Division I men's tournament, beginning in 2019.[25] It was extended to the D-I women's tournament effective in 2021.[26]Nellie BallAn unconventional offensive strategy developed by NBA head coach Don Nelson. It is an offense that relies on two things: (1) smaller, more athletic players who can create mismatches by outrunning their opponents, and (2) a strong emphasis on three-point shooting, which is generally a staple of the offense. A true center is not needed to run Nellie Ball, although this strategy is most effective against teams that do not have the athleticism or shooting ability to keep up with the fast pace of the offense.no-charge semicircleFIBA's term for the restricted area (definition 2).O[edit]O BoardsOffensive rebound.  Grabbing the rebound by an offensive player.offensive foulA foul committed by an offensive player.offensive reboundThe team that last shot the ball regains control of the ball on a reboundone-and-doneA player expected to declare themselves eligible for the NBA draft after a single season in college.one-and-oneIn NCAA men's rules, a free-throw attempt which, if made, allows the player a second free-throw attempt. This rule previously existed in NCAA women's and NFHS play, respectively being eliminated in 2015 and 2023. See also bonus.one trillionA box score showing one minute played and zero for all other statistics, resulting in a one followed by twelve zeros \u2013 the conventional American rendering of the number one trillion.outlet passA pass thrown by a rebounder to start a fast break.over-and-backSee backcourt violation.over the backA foul committed by a player who tries to rebound the ball by pushing, moving, or climbing on the back of a player who is already in position to rebound the ball.overtimeWhen the score is tied at the end of regulation play, the teams play an extra period, normally five minutes in length (four minutes in the NFHS) to determine the winner. Not normally utilized in 3x3 and leagues and tournaments that employ the Elam Ending to end games (e.g. The Basketball Tournament, Canadian Elite Basketball League, and the NBA G League's regular season).P[edit]packTo roughly hit down a ball that an opposing player has just released for a shot. See also swat.pack-line defenseA man-to-man defensive system in which one player pressures the ball and the other four \"pack\" down within an imaginary \"line\" extending to about 2 feet (60\u00a0cm) inside the three-point arc, with the intent of preventing dribble penetration. The system, derived from a number of other man-to-man systems, was developed by Dick Bennett, and has been popularized in the 21st century by coaches including his son Tony, Chris Mack, and Sean Miller.[27]paintAnother name for the key, often referring only to the painted area below the free-throw line.palmingSpecifically referring to the habit of an offensive player to hold the ball at the apex of its bounce while dribbling, usually by gripping the ball firmly in the dribbling hand. In organized play this is always considered a dribbling penalty, often called a carry or double dribble. In non-organized play this is typically considered rude and is generally discouraged by the defensive players.pass1.\u00a0\u00a0To throw or bounce the ball to a teammate.2.\u00a0\u00a0The act of passing to a teammate.pass and chase1.\u00a0\u00a0To pass the ball to another teammate and immediately  follow the pass to either pick and roll, slip by, accept a handoff back, or other basketball moves.[28]Performance Index RatingA player rating originally used by Liga ACB to determine weekly and season MVPs and later adopted by Euroleague Basketball to determine the same awards in the EuroLeague and EuroCup. No longer used to determine season MVPs in the EuroLeague and EuroCup, but still used for weekly awards, and also used by many other European domestic leagues. It is calculated from statistics available in standard European box scores by adding the numerical values for a player's recorded points, assists, rebounds, blocks, steals, fouls drawn, free throws made, 2-point field goals made, and 3-point field goals made, and subtracting turnovers, own shots blocked, fouls committed, free throw attempts, 2-point field goal attempts, and 3-point field goal attempts.perimeterThe area outside the key but well inside the three-point arc.Philippine Basketball Association (PBA)A professional basketball league in the Philippines. It is the second oldest professional basketball league in the world after the NBA.pickSee screen.pick and rollAn offensive play in which a player sets a screen (pick) for a teammate handling the ball and then slips behind the defender (rolls) to accept a pass.Pinoy stepA move in which an offensive player dribbles towards the basket, does a pump fake, then proceeds to make an actual shot after the last remaining legal step.pivotThe pivot center, or to lightly pick up one foot and spin with the next so as to avoid traveling.pivot footThe foot that must remain touching the floor to avoid traveling.player control foulA foul which occurs when the player with the ball crashes into a defender; sometimes incorrectly referred to as a charge.pocket passA skillful pass through a narrow gap in the defense, especially to complete a pick and roll play.point forwardA forward with strong ballhandling and passing skills who can be called upon to direct the team's offense.point guard (PG)Shortest player and best ball-handler on the court. Responsible for directing the team's offense.points in the paintField goals made in the painted area below the free-throw line.positionless basketballA concept of roster construction and game play in which most or all key players regularly switch positions, often during games.[29]possession arrowA physical or electronic arrow at the scorer's table that determines the next possession under the alternating possession rule. After the opening jump ball, it is set to point in the direction in which the team that lost the jump ball is moving on offense, and is switched each time the alternating possession rule is invoked.post upTo go in or near the key, turn so that you are facing away from the basket but towards a teammate who has the ball, and try to establish position to receive a pass.power forward (PF)Usually the second-tallest player on the court. Plays a similar role to the center.prayerA shot that has very little probability of being made.Princeton offenseAn offensive basketball strategy which emphasizes constant motion, passing, backdoor cuts, picks on and off the ball, and disciplined teamwork. Used and perfected at Princeton University, it is especially designed for a unit of five players who can each pass, shoot, and dribble at an above-average level.prioritizationA clause in the 2020 WNBA collective bargaining agreement that, since 2023, has severely penalized veteran players who report late to training camp. The expectation is that WNBA players will make that league their priority.[30]pump fakeFor an offensive player to start a shooting motion without their feet leaving the floor and then to quickly stop. The intent is gain an advantage if the feet of an over-eager defensive player leaves the floorputback dunkA dunk performed in the air during an offensive rebound.Q[edit]quadruple-doubleDouble-digit figures in four positive statistical categories, especially when achieved by an individual player (e.g. 10 points, 10 rebounds, 10 assists, and 10 steals).quintuple-doubleDouble-digit figures in five positive statistical categories, especially when achieved by an individual player (e.g. 10 points, 10 rebounds, 10 assists, 10 blocks, and 10 steals).R[edit]rainbow shotA perfect high shot arc on a shot that goes in, usually resulting from a fluent shooting motion and usually on a long shot attempt.rating percentage index (RPI)A tool long used by the NCAA in the selection process for its Division I men's and women's tournaments. Replaced for both tournaments by the NET\u2014men's in 2019, women's in 2021.rebound1.\u00a0\u00a0To obtain the ball after a missed field goal attempt.2.\u00a0\u00a0The act of rebounding.rejectedTo have one's shot blocked.restricted area1.\u00a0\u00a0An alternate term for the free-throw lane.2.\u00a0\u00a0An area within the free-throw lane, designated by a semicircle in front of the basket, in which contact fouls involving a driving offensive player and a stationary defender are by rule called as a blocking foul on the defender (with limited exceptions in the NBA rule set). Called the \"no-charge semicircle\" in the FIBA rules.rim1.\u00a0\u00a0The physical rim on a basketball goal.2.\u00a0\u00a0The area immediately surrounding the basket, often defined in shot charts as either the restricted area (definition 2) or a circle around the basket whose diameter matches the width of the free-throw lane.rim protectionDefense in the area closest to the rim.rimshotA toss in which the ball hits the rim of the basket.[31][32]rip a CA motion used while chinning the ball to create space during a pivot between an offensive player and a defensive player. Pivot towards the defender and rips the ball in a C-shape away from the pressure to create a passing lane.rockAnother name for the basketball.runAn interval in which one team heavily outscores the other.run and gunA combined offensive and defensive system devoted to increasing the pace of the game. On offense, the ball is moved upcourt as fast as possible, with the goal of taking the first shot available (often a three-pointer). The defense uses full-court pressure in an attempt to cause turnovers. See also Grinnell System.S[edit]screenAlso called a pick.1.\u00a0\u00a0To attempt to prevent a defender from guarding a teammate by standing in the defender's way. The screening player must remain stationary; a moving screen is an offensive foul.2.\u00a0\u00a0The tactic of setting a screen.screen assistAwarded when a player sets a screen for a teammate that directly results in that teammate making a basket. While not appearing in standard box scores, it is recorded in the NBA, and is one of the statistics that league uses in determining the recipient of its annual Hustle Award.[33][34]secondary assistAlso called a hockey assist.A pass to a teammate who in turn immediately (within 1 second in the NBA) makes a second pass that results in a basket, awarding the second player an assist. While not appearing in standard box scores, these are recorded in the NBA and several other leagues. The alternate term \"hockey assist\" comes from the ice hockey practice of awarding assists not only to the player whose pass leads immediately to a goal, but also to the teammate who made the next-to-last pass in the sequence.[35][36]secondary breakAn offensive phase after an initial fast break is stopped but before the opponent can enter into its set defense.set shotA shot taken without the shooter's feet leaving the floor (i.e. without jumping).shooting guard (SG)One of the five positions in basketball. The shooting guard is generally the team's best scorer and the second-shortest player.shot clockA timer designed to increase the pace (and, consequently, the frequency of scoring) by requiring a shot to be released before the timer expires; if the ball does not touch the rim or enter the basket, a shot-clock violation is called, which results in a loss of possession for the shooting team. The time limit is 24 seconds in the NBA, WNBA, and FIBA play. 30 seconds in both men's and women's NCAA play, and 35 seconds in states that use a shot clock for NFHS play. See also air ball.sixth man/woman/player1.\u00a0\u00a0A player who does not start the game but is nonetheless an important player and is generally the first player off the bench, and who often has statistics comparable to those of starters.2.\u00a0\u00a0A superfan who believes that their fervent support of a team will have a direct influence on the outcome of a game that the team may be involved in; comparable to the twelfth man in various football codes and cricket.slasherA player who primarily drives, or \"slashes,\" to the basket when on offense.small forward (SF)One of the five positions in basketball. Small forwards are generally the most versatile players and typically the third-tallest on the floor.splashOccurs when a player makes a shot in which the ball does not touch the backboard or the rim of the basket (a \"swish\").split-actionUtilizes a post and two perimeter players (one with the ball); the ball-handler passes-in to the post player then immediately moves to set a screen for/receive a screen from the second perimeter player.  The post passes the ball out to the free perimeter player for a shot-attemptstealTo gain possession of the ball from the opposing team by intercepting a pass, knocking the ball off a dribble, or slapping it legally out of an opponent's handsstretch fiveA center (\"5\") capable of \"stretching\" a defense with their outside shooting ability. Analogous to the stretch four, this positional hybrid has emerged mainly in the NBA in the 2010s.[37][38]stretch fourA power forward (\"4\") capable of \"stretching\" a defense with their outside shooting ability.stripeAlso called the charity stripe.The free-throw line.stroking the tresMaking a three point shot.swingmanA player capable of playing either the shooting guard or small forward positions.swatTo deflect an opposing player's shot off course so that it misses completely. See also pack.swishAlso hoopie and nothing-but-net.1.\u00a0\u00a0A shot which goes through the net without hitting the rim of the basket, and generally without hitting the backboard either (though there is some disagreement about the requirement of the latter).2.\u00a0\u00a0To make a shot in such a manner.switchA style of defense in which match-ups change often rather than being set for an entire quarter or game. In its extreme form, this can mean that the offensive player that a defensive player is guarding changes multiple times within one possession. The switch is often employed against an offense that relies on a pick and roll strategy.[39]T[edit]technical foulAlso simply called a technical or abbreviated as T.A foul assessed for unsportsmanlike behavior that does not involve physical contact and for some procedural violations (for example, having too many players on the court or calling a timeout when none remain). Technical fouls are penalized by loss of possession after a free throw, which may be taken by any member of the opposing team.The Basketball Tournament (TBT)A single-elimination tournament, currently involving 64 teams, held in the U.S. during the NBA offseason, currently with a $1 million winner-take-all purse.three-point field goalAlso called a three-pointer or simply a three, and abbreviated 3FG.A shot worth three points that must be attempted with both feet behind the three-point line.three-point play1.\u00a0\u00a0A play in which a shooter is fouled while making a standard two-point field goal and then makes the resulting free throw, such that a total of three points is scored. See also and one.2.\u00a0\u00a0(rarely) A play in which a shooter is fouled while taking but missing a three-point field goal and then makes all three resulting free throws.three-pointerAnother name for a three-point field goal.throw-in foulA category of personal foul created by FIBA in 2022, defined as a foul committed during the last 2 minutes of any playing period (quarter or overtime) by a defensive player during a throw-in, but before the thrower releases the ball. Penalized by 1 free throw and possession, regardless of the current penalty situation.toilet bowlWhen the ball hits the rim of the basket at a certain angle and then circles around it before going in or out.transition defenseThe portion of a team's defensive play conducted when the other team has first gained possession and is moving up the court, before both teams have established positions; this includes defense against fast breaks. See also halfcourt defense.transition offenseThe portion of a team's offensive play conducted when first obtaining possession from the other team and moving up the court, before both teams have established positions; this includes fast breaks. See also halfcourt offense.travelTo move one's pivot foot illegally, to fall to the floor without maintaining a pivot foot, or to take three or more steps without dribbling the ball. Such violations are referred to as traveling; the precise rules regarding the infraction vary by ruleset.treyAnother name for a three-point field goal.triangle offenseAn offensive strategy with the goal of exchanging three (sometimes all five) positions, creating spacing among players and allowing each one to pass to four teammates. The most important feature of the triangle offense is the sideline triangle created by the center in the low post, a forward at the wing, and a guard at the corner; the other guard stands at the top of the key and the weak-side forward on the weak-side high post, together forming the \"two-man game\". Every pass and cut has a purpose, and each is dictated by the movements of the opposing defense.trillionA statistic formed by a player playing some number of minutes, but recording no stats.  Coined by Harvey Pollack, because of the way the numbers read across a basketball box score.triple-doubleDouble-digit figures in three positive statistical categories in a single game, especially when achieved by an individual player (e.g. 10 points, 10 rebounds, and 10 assists).triple-singleAn individual player posting single-digit figures in the three principal statistical categories of points, rebounds and assists during a single game.  Popularized and possibly coined by Charles Barkley in reference to Draymond Green.true road gameIn U.S. college basketball, a game played by a particular team on an opponent's home court, or sometimes a larger venue in that opponent's home area in which the opponent controls ticket sales. This distinction has been drawn in the 21st century because of an increasing number of early-season events\u2014both individual games and tournaments\u2014held in locations at which neither team can be considered to have any significant home-court advantage, known as neutral sites.turnoverA loss of possession, either during ordinary play or as the result of a penalty for an infraction of the rules.tweenerA term, sometimes used derisively, for a player who is able to play two positions, but is not ideally suited to play either position exclusively. A tweener has a set of skills that do not match the traditional position of the player's physical stature.U[edit]UCLA High Post OffenseAn offensive strategy used by UCLA head coach John Wooden. Due to the program's immense success under Wooden's guidance, this offense has become one of the most popular offensive tactics in basketball. Elements of it are commonly used at all levels of the game, including in the NBA.Union of European Leagues of Basketball (ULEB)A cooperative organization of European professional basketball leagues which operated the Euroleague and Eurocup before handing responsibility to the Euroleague Basketball Company.unsportsmanlike foul(FIBA and NCAA women's) An egregious foul involving excessive physical contact, fouling with no intention to make a play on the ball, or fouling an opponent on a breakaway from behind. In NCAA women's play, this category also includes contact dead-ball technical fouls. It is roughly equivalent to the NBA's flagrant-1.up and downA traveling violation which occurs when the ball carrier jumps vertically into the air and does not get rid of it before landing.V[edit]vertical jumpThe act of raising one's center of gravity higher in the vertical plane solely with the use of one's own muscles; it is a measure of how high an individual athlete can elevate off the ground from a standstill.violationAn infraction of the rules other than a foul, such as traveling or a three-second violation.V-cutA move where a player moves to the player defending them, then quickly turns and receives the ball; used to fake the defender.W[edit]walkTo walk without dribbling the ball.wedgieWhen the basketball gets stuck between the rim and backboard.wing1.\u00a0\u00a0An area located on either side of the court, outside the three-second lane, along an imaginary extension of the free-throw line.2.\u00a0\u00a0A swingman, especially one who generally operates from the above area on offense.Women's Basketball Invitation Tournament (WBIT)A secondary postseason tournament for NCAA Division I women's teams, held for the first time in 2023\u201324. The NCAA operates it as a direct parallel to the men's NIT.Women's National Basketball Association (WNBA)Also called The W.The largest professional basketball league for women in the United States.Women's National Invitation Tournament (WNIT)A tournament for NCAA Division I women's teams, with both preseason and postseason versions. The preseason version was founded in 1994, and the postseason version was founded in 1998. The latter includes teams that do not qualify for the NCAA championship tournament. Before the 1998\u201399 season, both events were known as the National Women's Invitational Tournament, inheriting the name of a similar postseason event that operated from 1969 to 1996. Despite the name, the WNIT has no relation to the men's NIT\u2014it is not operated by the NCAA, and was never under the control of any of the bodies that ran the men's NIT before 2006.Z[edit]zoneShort name for the painted area of the key, between the  baseline and the free-throw line.zone defenseA defensive strategy in which each player is responsible for defending a particular area of the court. Contrast man-to-man defense.See also[edit]Basketball movesIndex of basketball-related articlesOutline of basketballReferences[edit]^ Cowen, Tyler (March 23, 2011). \"Endgame for basketball, the 2-for-1\". Marginal Revolution. Retrieved May 24, 2018.^ Joseph, Adi (June 27, 2014). \"'3-and-D': The specialist's path to a long NBA career\". USA Today. Retrieved March 21, 2018.^ Herbert, James (June 27, 2017). \"NBA Free Agency 2017: Breaking down the best 3-and-D guys on the free-agent market\". CBSSports.com. Retrieved March 21, 2018.^ Rule 5 (Violations), Article 26.  \"Official Basketball Rules 2014\" (PDF). FIBA. 2014. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 9, 2016. Retrieved March 2, 2014.^ 2009-2011 Men's & Women's Basketball Rules Archived 2012-08-06 at the Wayback Machine Rule 4, Section 5, Article 2. Retrieved July 27, 2010^ NBA Official Rules (2009-2010) Rule 11, Section I, a, b, f, and h. Retrieved July 27, 2010^ a b Dauster, Rob (February 28, 2018). \"College Basketball Bid Thieves: What teams could steal a spot in the tournament from the bubble?\". NBC Sports. Retrieved March 8, 2018.^ Everson, Darren (March 26, 2009). \"College Basketball's Moveable Beasts\". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on May 1, 2009. Retrieved March 13, 2012.^ Complete Idiot's Guide to Basketball.^ Entertainment Weekly Seinfeld Companion^ Livingston, Bill (June 11, 2015). \"Delly's circus shot gave Cavs life, lead: Livingston\". The Plain Dealer. Retrieved May 25, 2020.^ \"The Evolution and Anatomy of the Combo-Forward\". NBADraft.net. August 17, 2012. Retrieved December 6, 2019.^ \"cornerman\". Merriam-Webster.com. Retrieved July 22, 2018.^ Ryan, Shane (April 4, 2013). \"The Cardinal Rules\". Grantland.com. Retrieved April 8, 2013. The point is that every missed shot has to have a rebound. And to be able to balance the box score, there needs to be a rebound for every miss. That way you know the box score adds up. It's kind of like a geometry proof, where the left side has to equal the right side.^ Schaller, Bob and Harnish, Dave (2009). The Everything Kids' Basketball Book: The all-time greats, legendary teams, today's superstars - and tips on playing like a pro. Adams Media. p.\u00a088. ISBN\u00a09781440521270.{{cite book}}:  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)^ Lowe, Zach (June 18, 2018). \"New kind of crunch time has NBA luminaries excited\". ESPN.com. Retrieved June 21, 2018.^ \"Elam Ending Returns to CEBL for 2021 Season\" (Press release). Canadian Elite Basketball League. May 19, 2021. Retrieved June 22, 2022.^ \"2022-23 MBA G League Schedule Release\" (Press release). NBA G League. September 1, 2022. Retrieved December 4, 2022.^ Ward-Henninger, Colin (March 29, 2020). \"Eliminating foul outs, and six more radical NBA ideas to ponder during the coronavirus sports hiatus\". CBSSports.com. Retrieved March 29, 2020.^ Bontemps, Tim (August 27, 2018). \"The NBA is trying to speed up the game again. That's good for the league and for fans\". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 29, 2020.^ Thompson, Marcus, II, and Shams Charania, \"Steph Curry's 50-point masterpiece started well before Game 7, with a speech and a promise to his Warriors\", The Athletic, April 30, 2023. Retrieved 2023-05-01. Quote: \"Curry, early in the game, waved off a screen. He wanted to go iso. ...\" (subscription required)^ no by-line (January 6, 2005). \"Basketball U on Hoops Lingo\". www.NBA.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Retrieved October 6, 2014.^ \"What is a logo 3 in NBA? Closer look at one of the hardest feats in the league,\" from Sportskeeda, 2/17/2024 (accessed 3/9/2024)^ \"Caitlin Clark's Record-Breaking Three From the Logo Left College Basketball Fans in Awe,\" from Sports Illustrated, 2/15/2024 (accessed 3/9/2024)^ Norlander, Matt (August 22, 2018). \"The NCAA ending the RPI in favor of the 'NET' is a long-overdue overhaul on an outdated process\". CBSSports.com. Retrieved August 22, 2018.^ Voepel, Mechelle (May 4, 2020). \"Women's Div. I hoop switching from RPI to NET to assess teams\". ESPN.com. Retrieved May 6, 2020.^ Winn, Luke (March 12, 2012). \"First Line Of Defense\". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved March 24, 2014.^ https://medium.com/the-basketball-dictionary/throw-and-chase-338de2ca3154^ Gunasekaram, Pirasanth (August 14, 2021). \"The Toronto Raptors are embracing the positionless basketball movement\". Raptors Rapture. FanSided. Retrieved October 15, 2021.^ Negley, Cassandra (February 11, 2022). \"What is WNBA prioritization? Potentially a huge problem, and Breanna Stewart knows it\". Yahoo Sports. Retrieved August 16, 2022.^ \"Oxford Languages | the Home of Language Data\". oxforddictionaries.com. Archived from the original on August 12, 2014. Retrieved July 18, 2012.^ \"Longest rimshot ever\". YouTube. Retrieved July 18, 2013.^ \"SAST\". NBA Advanced Stats. NBA. Retrieved August 31, 2022.^ \"Boston's Marcus Smart wins 2021-22 NBA Hustle Award\" (Press release). NBA. May 23, 2022. Retrieved August 31, 2022.^ \"Secondary Assist\". NBA Advanced Stats. NBA. Retrieved August 31, 2022.^ Levy, Ian (January 7, 2022). \"The Whiteboard: Nobody does the hockey assist like the Golden State Warriors\". FanSided. Retrieved August 31, 2022.^ \"Inside the Growth of All-Star Marc Gasol: Stretch-5 Threat and Style Trendsetter\". National Basketball Players Association. February 13, 2017. Retrieved May 31, 2018.^ O'Connor, Kevin (May 10, 2017). \"Al Horford and the Rise of the Stretch 5\". The Ringer. Retrieved May 31, 2018.^ Feigen, Jonathan (May 19, 2018). \"How NBA defenses 'switched' to a new style\". Houston Chronicle. Retrieved May 24, 2018.vteBasketballGeneral topicsGlossary of termsIndex of articlesLeaguesFIBANBAAAUHistoryJames NaismithProtocol of StockholmVariationsSlamballStreetballOne-on-oneTwenty-oneThree-on-threeSix-on-sixWheelchairRulesJump ballOfficialsTurnoverTrent Tucker RuleViolations3 secondsOffenseDefense5 secondsTime line (8/10 seconds)Basket interferenceCarryingDouble dribbleGoaltendingShot clockTravelingFoulsFlagrantPersonalTechnicalBonusThree-point playFour-point playGame playPositionsSixth manGuardPointShootingComboForwardSmallPowerStretchPointCenterStatisticsPlayer trackingWinning streaksOffensePointField goalThree-pointerReboundAssist50\u201340\u201390 club100-point scorersDefenseBlockStealMovesDribbleCrossoverEuro stepFlopScreenBack screenSlashingShootingFree throwJump shotFadeawayLayupFinger rollSlam dunkPosterizedAlley-oopBackboard shatteringHook shotAir ballBuzzer beaterUncontestedStrategyGeneralPlaybookPracticeShootaroundDrillsMikanTipOffenseBall hogGravityContinuityFlexShuffleUCLA High PostWheelFour cornersPick and rollTriangleMotionPrincetonDribble driveFast breakFlyCherry pickingRun and gunGrinnell SystemNellie BallSmall ballDefenseDouble teamFull-court pressHack-a-ShaqJordan RulesMan-to-manZone1\u20132\u20131\u201311\u20133\u201312\u20133LineMatch-upHybridAmoebaBox-and-oneTriangle-and-twoEquipmentBackboardBallBasketRim (Breakaway rim)CourtGlassHalf courtKeyNetWhistleClothingUniformSleeveFinger sleeveAir JordanChuck Taylor All-StarsMediaList of filmsTrading cards\u00a0Basketball portalOutline of basketballvteGlossaries of sportsSports terms named after peopleAmerican footballArcheryAssociation footballAthleticsAustralian rules footballBaseballderived idiomsBasketballBoard gamesBowlingBowlsCanadian footballChesschess problemscomputer chessClimbingContract bridgeCricketCue sportsCurlingCyclingpartsDartsDisc golfEquestrianAustralian and New Zealand puntingNorth American horse racingFencingItalian termsFigure skatingGaelic gamesGolfGymnasticsIce hockeyKabaddiKho khoMotorsportPickleballPokerProfessional wrestlingRowingRugby leagueRugby unionShooting sportSkiing and snowboardingSkiing and snowboardingSumoSurfingTable tennisTennisTrampoliningUnderwater divingVolleyballWater poloWing ChunCategoryRetrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Glossary_of_basketball_terms&oldid=1220908535\""},{"link": "https://en.wikipedia.org//wiki/Olympic_Games", "content": "Major international multi-sport eventThis article is about the modern games in general. For the most recent games in Beijing, China, see 2022 Winter Olympics. For the upcoming games in Paris, France, see 2024 Summer Olympics. For the ancient Greek games, see Ancient Olympic Games. For other uses, see Olympic (disambiguation).Olympic GamesMain topicsBidsBoycottsCeremoniesCharterHost citiesIFsIOCMedalMedal tablesMedalistsNOCsOlympismPierre de Coubertin medalScandals and controversiesSportsSymbolsTelevisionTorch relaysVenuesWomen participationGamesSummerWinterYouthEsportsAfricanAsianEuropeanPacificPan-AmericanAncientIntercalatedvteThe modern Olympic Games or Olympics (French: Jeux olympiques)[a][1] are the leading international sporting events featuring summer and winter sports competitions in which thousands of athletes from around the world participate in a variety of competitions. The Olympic Games are considered the world's foremost sports competition with more than 200 teams, representing sovereign states and territories participating; by default the Games generally substitute for any World Championships the year in which they take place (however, each class usually maintains their own records).[2] The Olympic Games are held every four years; since 1994, they have been alternated between the Summer and Winter Olympics every two years during the four-year period.[3][4]Their creation was inspired by the ancient Olympic Games, held in Olympia, Greece from the 8th century BC to the 4th century AD. Baron Pierre de Coubertin founded the International Olympic Committee (IOC) in 1894, leading to the first modern Games in Athens in 1896. The IOC is the governing body of the Olympic Movement, which encompasses all entities and individuals involved in the Olympic Games. The Olympic Charter defines their structure and authority.The evolution of the Olympic Movement during the 20th and 21st centuries has resulted in numerous changes to the Olympic Games. Some of these adjustments include the creation of the Winter Olympic Games for snow and ice sports, the Paralympic Games for athletes with disabilities, the Youth Olympic Games for athletes aged 14 to 18, the five Continental games (Pan American, African, Asian, European, and Pacific), and the World Games for sports that are not contested in the Olympic Games. The IOC also endorses the Deaflympics and the Special Olympics. The IOC has needed to adapt to a variety of economic, political, and technological advancements. The abuse of amateur rules by the Eastern Bloc nations prompted the IOC to shift away from pure amateurism, as envisioned by Coubertin, to the acceptance of professional athletes participating at the Games. The growing importance of mass media has created the issue of corporate sponsorship and general commercialisation of the Games. World Wars I and II led to the cancellation of the 1916, 1940, and 1944 Olympics; large-scale boycotts during the Cold War limited participation in the 1980 and 1984 Olympics;[5] and the 2020 Olympics were postponed until 2021 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.The Olympic Movement consists of international sports federations (IFs), National Olympic Committees (NOCs), and organising committees for each specific Olympic Games. As the decision-making body, the IOC is responsible for choosing the host city for each Games, and organises and funds the Games according to the Olympic Charter. The IOC also determines the Olympic programme, consisting of the sports to be contested at the Games. There are several Olympic rituals and symbols, such as the Olympic flag, torch, and opening and closing ceremonies. Over 14,000 athletes competed at the 2020 Summer Olympics and 2022 Winter Olympics combined, in 40 different sports and 448 events.[6][7] The first-, second-, and third-place finishers in each event receive Olympic medals: gold, silver, and bronze, respectively.The Games have grown to the point that nearly every nation is now represented; colonies and overseas territories are often allowed to field their own teams. This growth has created numerous challenges and controversies, including boycotts, doping, bribery, and terrorism. Every two years, the Olympics and its media exposure provide athletes with the chance to attain national and international fame. The Games also provide an opportunity for the host city and country to showcase themselves to the world.Ancient OlympicsMain article: Ancient Olympic GamesThe Ancient Olympic Games stadium in Olympia, GreeceThe Ancient Olympic Games (Ancient Greek: \u03c4\u1f70 \u1f48\u03bb\u03cd\u03bc\u03c0\u03b9\u03b1, ta Olympia[8]) were religious and athletic festivals held every four years at the sanctuary of Zeus in Olympia, Greece. Competition was among representatives of several city-states and kingdoms of Ancient Greece. These Games featured mainly athletic but also combat sports such as wrestling and the pankration, horse and chariot racing events. It has been widely written that during the Games, all conflicts among the participating city-states were postponed until the Games were finished. This cessation of hostilities was known as the Olympic peace or truce.[9] This idea is a modern myth because the Greeks never suspended their wars. The truce did allow those religious pilgrims who were travelling to Olympia to pass through warring territories unmolested because they were protected by Zeus.[10]The origin of the Olympics is shrouded in mystery and legend;[11] one of the most popular myths identifies Heracles and his father Zeus as the progenitors of the Games.[12][13][14] According to legend, it was Heracles who first called the Games \"Olympic\" and established the custom of holding them every four years.[15] The myth continues that after Heracles completed his twelve labours, he built the Olympic Stadium as an honour to Zeus. Following its completion, he walked in a straight line for 200 steps and called this distance a \"stadion\" (Ancient Greek: \u03c3\u03c4\u03ac\u03b4\u03b9\u03bf\u03bd, Latin: stadium, \"stage\"), which later became a unit of distance. The most widely accepted inception date for the Ancient Olympics is 776\u00a0BC; this is based on inscriptions, found at Olympia, listing the winners of a footrace held every four years starting in 776\u00a0BC.[16] The Ancient Games featured running events, a pentathlon (consisting of a jumping event, discus and javelin throws, a foot race, and wrestling), boxing, wrestling, pankration, and equestrian events.[17][18] Tradition has it that Coroebus, a cook from the city of Elis, was the first Olympic champion.[19]The Olympics were of fundamental religious importance, featuring sporting events alongside ritual sacrifices honouring both Zeus (whose famous statue by Phidias stood in his temple at Olympia) and Pelops, divine hero and mythical king of Olympia. Pelops was famous for his chariot race with King Oenomaus of Pisatis.[20] The winners of the events were admired and immortalised in poems and statues.[21] The Games were held every four years, and this period, known as an Olympiad, was used by Greeks as one of their units of time measurement. The Games were part of a cycle known as the Panhellenic Games, which included the Pythian Games, the Nemean Games, and the Isthmian Games.[22]The Olympic Games reached the height of their success in the 6th and 5th\u00a0centuries\u00a0BC, but then gradually declined in importance as the Romans gained power and influence in Greece. While there is no scholarly consensus as to when the Games officially ended, the most commonly held date is 393\u00a0AD, when the emperor Theodosius I decreed that all pagan cults and practices be eliminated.[b] Another date commonly cited is 426\u00a0AD, when his successor, Theodosius II, ordered the destruction of all Greek temples.[23]Modern GamesSee also: List of Olympic Games host citiesForerunnersPierre de Coubertin, co-founder of the International Olympic Committee and its second presidentVarious uses of the term \"Olympic\" to describe athletic events in the modern era have been documented since the 17th century. The first such event was the Cotswold Games or \"Cotswold Olimpick Games\", an annual meeting near Chipping Campden, England, involving various sports. It was first organised by the lawyer Robert Dover between 1612 and 1642, with several later celebrations leading up to the present day. The British Olympic Association, in its bid for the 2012 Olympic Games in London, mentioned these games as \"the first stirrings of Britain's Olympic beginnings\".[24]L'Olympiade de la R\u00e9publique, a national Olympic festival held annually from 1796 to 1798 in Revolutionary France also attempted to emulate the ancient Olympic Games.[25] The competition included several disciplines from the ancient Greek Olympics. The 1796 Games also marked the introduction of the metric system into sport.[25]The 1834 handbill, written in phonetic vernacular, advertising \"Ho-limpyc Gaymes\" in Oswestry, Shropshire, EnglandIn 1834 and 1836, Olympic games were held in Raml\u00f6sa, Sweden, and in Stockholm, in 1843, organised by Gustaf Johan Schartau and others. At most 25,000 spectators saw the games.[26]In 1850, an Olympian Class was started by William Penny Brookes at Much Wenlock, in Shropshire, England. In 1859, Brookes changed the name to the Wenlock Olympian Games. This annual sports festival continues to this day.[27] The Wenlock Olympian Society was founded by Brookes on 15 November 1860.[28]Between 1862 and 1867, Liverpool held an annual Grand Olympic Festival. Devised by John Hulley and Charles Pierre Melly, these games were the first to be wholly amateur in nature and international in outlook, although only 'gentlemen amateurs' could compete.[29][30] The programme of the first modern Olympiad in Athens in 1896 was almost identical to that of the Liverpool Olympics.[31] In 1865 Hulley, Brookes and E.G. Ravenstein founded the National Olympian Association in Liverpool, a forerunner of the British Olympic Association. Its articles of foundation provided the framework for the International Olympic Charter.[32] In 1866, a national Olympic Games in Great Britain was organised at London's Crystal Palace.[33]RevivalEvangelos Zappas, co-founder of the International Olympic CommitteeGreek interest in reviving the Olympic Games began with the Greek War of Independence from the Ottoman Empire in 1821. It was first proposed by poet and newspaper editor Panagiotis Soutsos in his poem \"Dialogue of the Dead\", published in 1833.[34] Evangelos Zappas, a wealthy Greek-Romanian philanthropist, first wrote to King Otto of Greece, in 1856, offering to fund a permanent revival of the Olympic Games.[35] Zappas sponsored the first Olympic Games in 1859, which was held in an Athens city square. Athletes participated from Greece and the Ottoman Empire. Zappas funded the restoration of the ancient Panathenaic Stadium so that it could host all future Olympic Games.[35]The stadium hosted Olympics in 1870 and 1875.[36] Thirty thousand spectators attended that Games in 1870, though no official attendance records are available for the 1875 Games.[37] In 1890, after attending the Olympian Games of the Wenlock Olympian Society, Baron Pierre de Coubertin was inspired to found the International Olympic Committee (IOC).[38] Coubertin built on the ideas and work of Brookes and Zappas with the aim of establishing internationally rotating Olympic Games that would occur every four years.[38] He presented these ideas during the first Olympic Congress of the newly created International Olympic Committee. This meeting was held from 16 to 23 June 1894, at the University of Paris. On the last day of the Congress, it was decided that the first Olympic Games to come under the auspices of the IOC would take place in Athens in 1896.[39] The IOC elected the Greek writer Demetrius Vikelas as its first president.[40]1896 GamesMain article: 1896 Summer OlympicsThe opening ceremony of the 1896 Summer Olympics in Panathinaiko Stadium in AthensThe first Games held under the auspices of the IOC was hosted in the Panathenaic Stadium in Athens in 1896. The Games brought together 14 nations and 241 athletes who competed in 43 events.[41] Zappas and his cousin Konstantinos Zappas had left the Greek government a trust to fund future Olympic Games. This trust was used to help finance the 1896 Games.[42][43][44] George Averoff contributed generously for the refurbishment of the stadium in preparation for the Games.[45] The Greek government also provided funding, which was expected to be recouped through the sale of tickets and from the sale of the first Olympic commemorative stamp set.[45]Greek officials and the public were enthusiastic about the experience of hosting an Olympic Games.[46] This feeling was shared by many of the athletes, who even demanded that Athens be the permanent Olympic host city. The IOC intended for subsequent Games to be rotated to various host cities around the world. The second Olympics was held in Paris.[47]Changes and adaptationsMain article: Summer Olympic GamesFrancis Field at Washington University in St. Louis during the 1904 Summer OlympicsAfter the success of the 1896 Games, the Olympics entered a period of stagnation which threatened its survival. The Olympic Games held at the Paris Exposition in 1900 and the Louisiana Purchase Exposition at St. Louis in 1904 failed to attract much participation or notice. Of the 650 athletes in the 1904 Olympics, 580 were American; the winner of the marathon was later disqualified upon discovery of a photograph of him riding in a car during the race.[48] The Games rebounded with the 1906 Intercalated Games (so-called because they were the second Olympics to take place within the third Olympiad), which were held in Athens. These Games attracted a broad international field of participants and generated a great deal of public interest, marking the beginning of a rise in both the popularity and the size of the Olympics. The 1906 Games were officially recognised by the IOC at the time (although not any longer), and no Intercalated Games have been held since.[49]Winter GamesMain article: Winter Olympic GamesAn ice hockey game during the 1928 Winter Olympics at St. MoritzThe Winter Olympics was created to feature snow and ice sports that were logistically impossible to hold during the Summer Games. Figure skating (in 1908 and 1920) and ice hockey (in 1920) were featured as Olympic events at the Summer Olympics. The IOC desired to expand this list of sports to encompass other winter activities. At the 1921 Olympic Congress in Lausanne, it was decided to hold a winter version of the Olympic Games. A winter sports week (it was actually 11\u00a0days) was held in 1924 in Chamonix, France, in connection with the Paris Games held three months later; this event became the first Winter Olympic Games.[50] Although it was intended that the same country host both the Winter and Summer Games in a given year, this idea was quickly abandoned. The IOC mandated that the Winter Games be celebrated every four years in the same year as their summer counterpart.[51] This tradition was upheld through the 1992 Games in Albertville, France; after that, beginning with the 1994 Games, the Winter Olympics were held every four years, two years after each Summer Olympics.[52]ParalympicsMain article: Paralympic Games1964 Summer Paralympics in TokyoIn 1948, Sir Ludwig Guttmann, determined to promote the rehabilitation of soldiers after World War II, organised a multi-sport event between several hospitals to coincide with the 1948 London Olympics. Originally known as the Stoke Mandeville Games, Guttmann's event became an annual sports festival. Over the next 12 years, Guttmann and others continued their efforts to use sports as an avenue to healing.In 1960, Guttmann brought 400 athletes to Rome to compete in the \"Parallel Olympics\", which ran in parallel with the Summer Olympics and came to be known as the first Paralympics. Since then, the Paralympics have been held in every Olympic year and, starting with the 1988 Summer Games in Seoul, the host city for the Olympics has also played host to the Paralympics.[53][c] The International Olympic Committee (IOC) and the International Paralympic Committee (IPC) signed an agreement in 2001 which guaranteed that host cities would be contracted to manage both the Olympic and Paralympic Games.[55][56] The agreement came into effect at the 2008 Summer Games in Beijing, and at the 2010 Winter Games in Vancouver.Two years before the 2012 Games, the LOCOG chairman Lord Coe made the following statement about the Paralympics and Olympics in London:[57]We want to change public attitudes towards disability, celebrate the excellence of Paralympic sport and to enshrine from the very outset that the two Games are an integrated whole.Youth GamesMain article: Youth Olympic GamesIn 2010, the Olympic Games were complemented by the Youth Games, which give athletes between the ages of 14 and 18 the chance to compete. The Youth Olympic Games were conceived by IOC president Jacques Rogge in 2001 and approved during the 119th Congress of the IOC.[58][59] The first Summer Youth Games were held in Singapore from 14 to 26 August 2010, while the inaugural Winter Games were hosted in Innsbruck, Austria, two years later.[60] These Games will be shorter than the senior Games; the summer version will last twelve days, while the winter version will last nine days.[61] The IOC allows 3,500 athletes and 875 officials to participate at the Summer Youth Games, and 970 athletes and 580 officials at the Winter Youth Games.[62][63] The sports to be contested will coincide with those scheduled for the senior Games, however there will be variations on the sports including mixed NOC and mixed gender teams as well as a reduced number of disciplines and events.[64]21st-century GamesThe Summer Olympics have grown from 241 participants representing 14 nations in 1896, to more than 11,300 competitors representing 206 nations in 2020.[65] The scope and scale of the Winter Olympics is smaller; for example, Beijing hosted 2,971 athletes from 91\u00a0nations in 2022. Most of the athletes and officials are housed in the Olympic Village for the duration of the Games. This accommodation centre is designed to be a self-contained home for all Olympic participants, and is furnished with cafeterias, health clinics, and locations for religious expression.[66]The IOC has allowed the formation of National Olympic Committees (NOCs) to represent individual nations. These do not meet the strict requirements for political sovereignty that other international organisations demand. As a result, colonies and dependencies are permitted to compete at Olympic Games, examples being territories such as Puerto Rico, Bermuda, and Hong Kong, all of which compete as separate nations despite being legally a part of another country.[67] The current version of the Olympic Charter allows for the establishment of new NOCs to represent nations that qualify as \"an independent State recognised by the international community\".[68] Consequently, the IOC did not allow the formation of NOCs for Sint Maarten and Cura\u00e7ao when they gained the same constitutional status as Aruba in 2010, although the IOC had recognised the Aruban Olympic Committee in 1986.[69][70] Since 2012, athletes from the former Netherlands Antilles have had the option to represent either the Netherlands or Aruba.[71]Cost of the GamesSee also: Cost of the Olympic GamesThe Oxford Olympics Study 2016 found that, since 1960, sports-related costs for the Summer Games were on average US$5.2\u00a0billion and for the Winter Games $3.1\u00a0billion. These figures do not include wider infrastructure costs like roads, urban rail, and airports, which often cost as much or more than the sports-related costs. The most expensive Summer Games were Beijing 2008 at US$40\u201344\u00a0billion,[72] and the most expensive Winter Games were Sochi 2014 at US$51\u00a0billion.[73][74] As of 2016, costs per athlete were, on average, US$599,000 for the Summer Games and $1.3\u00a0million for the Winter Games; for London 2012, the cost per athlete was $1.4\u00a0million, and the figure was $7.9\u00a0million for Sochi 2014.[74]Where ambitious construction for the 1976 Summer Games in Montreal and the 1980 Summer Games in Moscow had burdened organisers with expenses greatly in excess of revenues, Los Angeles strictly controlled expenses for the 1984 Summer Games by using existing facilities and only two new that were paid for by corporate sponsors. The Organizing Committee led by Peter Ueberroth used some of the profits to endow the LA84 Foundation to promote youth sports in Southern California, educate coaches and maintain a sports library. The 1984 Summer Olympics are often considered until that date,the most financially successful modern Olympics and a model for future Games.[75]Budget overruns are common for the Games. Average overrun for Games since 1960 is 156% in real terms,[76] which means that actual costs turned out to be on average 2.56 times the budget that was estimated at the time of winning the bid to host the Games. Montreal 1976 had the highest cost overrun for Summer Games, and for any Games, at 720%; Lake Placid 1980 had the highest cost overrun for Winter Games, at 324%. London 2012 had a cost overrun of 76%, Sochi 2014 of 289%.[74]It has been documented that cost and cost overrun for the Games follow a power-law distribution, which means that, first, the Games are prone to large cost overruns and, second, it is only a matter of time until an overrun occurs that is larger than the largest to date. In short, hosting the Games is economically and financially extremely risky.[77]Economic and social impact on host cities and countriesSeeking a scholarly institution to independently research the Games, Bob Barney led efforts to establish the International Centre for Olympic Studies in 1989, endeavouring to write about sociocultural impacts of the Olympic Games.[78][79] He felt that the Olympics \"is worthy of study because it is one of the biggest meetings in a global context and has many political, economic, and other problems associated with it\".[78] He began Olympika in 1992, the first peer-reviewed academic journal focused on the Olympic Games.[80][81] The International Society of Olympic Historians was founded in 1991, which publishes the Journal of Olympic History.[82]Some economists are sceptical about the economic benefits of hosting the Olympic Games, emphasising that such \"mega-events\" often have large costs while yielding relatively few tangible benefits in the long run.[83] Hosting (or even bidding for) the Olympics appears to increase the host country's exports, as the host or candidate country sends a signal about trade openness when bidding to host the Games.[84] Research suggests that hosting the Summer Olympics has a positive effect on the philanthropic contributions of corporations headquartered in the host city, which seems to benefit the local nonprofit sector. This effect begins in the years leading up to the Games and might persist for several years afterwards, though not permanently.[85]The Games have had significant negative effects on host communities; for example, the Centre on Housing Rights and Evictions reports that the Olympics displaced more than two million people over two decades, often disproportionately affecting disadvantaged groups.[86] The 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi were the most expensive Olympic Games in history, costing in excess of US$50\u00a0billion. According to a report by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development released at the time of the games, the cost would not boost Russia's national economy, but could attract business to Sochi and the southern Krasnodar region of Russia as a result of improved services. But by December 2014, eight months after the games The Guardian stated that Sochi \"now feels like a ghost town\", citing the spread-out nature of the stadiums and arenas and the still-unfinished infrastructure.[87] At least four cities withdrew their bids for the 2022 Winter Olympics, citing the high costs or lack of local support,[88] resulting in only a two-city race between Almaty, Kazakhstan and Beijing, China who hosted the 2008 Summer Olympics. The Guardian stated that the biggest threat to the future of the Olympics is few cities or countries want to host them.[89] Bidding for the 2024 Summer Olympics became a two-city race between Paris and Los Angeles, so the IOC took the unusual step of simultaneously awarding both the 2024 Games to Paris and the 2028 Games to Los Angeles. Both of the bids were praised for high technical plans and innovative ways to use a record-breaking number of existing and temporary facilities.[90]International Olympic CommitteeSee also: International Olympic CommitteeThe Olympic Movement encompasses a large number of national and international sporting organisations and federations, recognised media partners, as well as athletes, officials, judges, and every other person and institution that agrees to abide by the rules of the Olympic Charter.[91] As the umbrella organisation of the Olympic Movement, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) is responsible for selecting the host city, overseeing the planning of the Olympic Games, updating and approving the Olympic sports programme, and negotiating sponsorship and broadcasting rights.[92]The Olympic Movement is made of three major elements:International Federations (IFs) are the governing bodies that supervise a sport at an international level. For example, the International Federation of Association Football (FIFA) is the IF for association football, and the F\u00e9d\u00e9ration Internationale de Volleyball is the international governing body for volleyball. There are currently 35 IFs in the Olympic Movement, representing each of the Olympic sports.[93]National Olympic Committees (NOCs) represent and regulate the Olympic Movement within each country. For example, the Russian Olympic Committee (ROC) is the NOC of the Russian Federation. There are currently 206 NOCs recognised by the IOC.[94][95]Organising Committees for the Olympic Games (OCOGs) are temporary committees responsible for the organisation of each Olympic Games. OCOGs are dissolved after each Games once the final report is delivered to the IOC.[96]French and English are the official languages of the Olympic Movement. The other language used at each Olympic Games is the language of the host country (or languages, if a country has more than one official language apart from French or English). Every proclamation (such as the announcement of each country during the parade of nations in the opening ceremony) is spoken in these three (or more) languages, or the main two depending on whether the host country is an English or French speaking country: French is always spoken first, followed by an English translation, and then the dominant language of the host nation (when this is not English or French).[97]Allegations of bribery and corruptionThe IOC has often been accused of being an intractable organisation, with several life members on the committee. The presidential terms of Avery Brundage and Juan Antonio Samaranch were especially controversial. Brundage fought strongly for amateurism and against the commercialisation of the Olympic Games, even as these attitudes came to be seen as incongruous with the realities of modern sports. The advent of state-sponsored athletes from the Eastern Bloc countries further eroded the ideology of the pure amateur, as it placed self-financed amateurs of Western countries at a disadvantage.[98] Brundage was accused of antisemitism and of racism in resisting the exclusion of South Africa.[99] Under the Samaranch presidency, the office was accused of both nepotism and corruption.[100] Samaranch's ties with the Franco regime in Spain were also a source of criticism.[101]In 1998, it was reported that several IOC members had taken gifts from members of the Salt Lake City bid committee for the hosting of the 2002 Winter Olympics. There were soon four independent investigations underway: by the IOC, the United States Olympic Committee (USOC), the Salt Lake Organizing Committee (SLOC), and the United States Department of Justice (DOJ). Although nothing strictly illegal had occurred, it was felt that the acceptance of the gifts was morally dubious. As a result of the investigation, ten members of the IOC were expelled and a further ten sanctioned.[102] Stricter rules were adopted for future bids, and caps were introduced to define how much IOC members could accept from bid cities. Additionally, new term and age limits were put into place for IOC membership, and fifteen former Olympic athletes were added to the committee. Nevertheless, from sporting and business standpoints, the 2002 Olympics were one of the most successful Winter Games in history; records were set in both the broadcasting and marketing programs. Over 2\u00a0billion viewers watched more than 13\u00a0billion viewer-hours.[103] The 2002 Games were also a financial success, raising more money with fewer sponsors than any prior Olympic Games, leaving SLOC with a surplus of $40\u00a0million. This excess revenue was used to create the Utah Athletic Foundation (also known as the Utah Olympic Legacy Foundation), which maintains and operates many of the surviving Olympic venues.[103]It was reported in 1999 that the Nagano Olympic bid committee had spent approximately $14\u00a0million on entertaining the 62 IOC members and many of their associates. The precise figures are unknown since Nagano destroyed the financial records after the IOC requested that the entertainment expenditures should not be made public.[104][105]In July 2000, when the Los Angeles Times reported on the tangled nature of how the IOC redistributes profits from sponsorships and broadcasting rights, Olympic historian Bob Barney stated that he had \"yet to see matters of corruption in the IOC\", but noted there were \"matters of unaccountability\".[106] He later noted that when the spotlight is on the athletes, it has \"the power to eclipse impressions of scandal or corruption\", with respect to the Olympic bid process.[107]An August 2004, a BBC documentary, Panorama: Buying the Games, reported the results of an investigation into bribes allegedly used in the bidding process for the 2012 Summer Olympics.[108] The documentary claimed that it was possible to bribe IOC members into voting for a particular candidate city. After being narrowly defeated in their bid for the 2012 Games,[109] Parisian mayor Bertrand Delano\u00eb specifically accused the British prime minister Tony Blair and the London bid committee, headed by former Olympic champion Sebastian Coe, of breaking the bid rules. He cited French president Jacques Chirac as a witness; Chirac gave guarded interviews concerning his involvement[110] but the allegation was never fully explored. Turin's bid to host the 2006 Winter Olympics was also clouded by controversy; a prominent IOC member, Marc Hodler, closely connected to the rival bid of Sion, alleged bribery of IOC officials by members of the Turin Organising Committee. These accusations led to a wide-ranging investigation, and also served to sour many IOC members against Sion's bid which potentially helped Turin to capture the host city nomination.[111]CommercialisationUnder national organising committeesThe Olympic Games have been commercialised to various degrees since the inaugural 1896 Summer Olympics in Athens, when a number of companies paid for advertising,[112] including Kodak.[113][114] In 1908, Oxo, Odol\u00a0[de] mouthwash, and Indian Foot Powder became official sponsors of the London Olympic Games.[115][116] Coca-Cola first sponsored the Summer Olympics in 1928, and has remained an Olympic sponsor ever since.[112] Before the IOC took control of sponsorship, the NOCs had responsibility for negotiating their own contracts for sponsorship and use of the Olympic symbols.[117]Under IOC controlThe IOC originally resisted funding by corporate sponsors. It was not until the retirement of IOC President Avery Brundage, in 1972, that the IOC began to explore the potential of the television medium and the lucrative advertising markets available to them.[117] Under the leadership of Juan Antonio Samaranch the Games began to shift toward international sponsors who sought to link their products to the Olympic brand.[118]BudgetDuring the first half of the 20th century, the IOC ran on a small budget.[118][119] As president of the IOC from 1952 to 1972, Avery Brundage rejected all attempts to link the Olympics with commercial interest.[117] Brundage believed the lobby of corporate interests would unduly impact the IOC's decision-making.[117] Brundage's resistance to this revenue stream meant the IOC left organising committees to negotiate their own sponsorship contracts and use the Olympic symbols.[117] When Brundage retired the IOC had US$2\u00a0million in assets; eight years later the IOC coffers had swelled to US$45\u00a0million.[117] This was primarily due to a shift in ideology toward expansion of the Games through corporate sponsorship and the sale of television rights.[117] When Juan Antonio Samaranch was elected IOC president in 1980 his desire was to make the IOC financially independent.[119]The 1984 Summer Olympics became a watershed moment in Olympic history. The Los Angeles-based organising committee, led by Peter Ueberroth, was able to generate a surplus of US$225\u00a0million, which was an unprecedented amount at that time.[120] The organising committee had been able to create such a surplus in part by selling exclusive sponsorship rights to select companies.[120] The IOC sought to gain control of these sponsorship rights. Samaranch helped to establish The Olympic Programme (TOP) in 1985, in order to create an Olympic brand.[118] Membership in TOP was, and is, very exclusive and expensive. Fees cost US$50\u00a0million for a four-year membership.[119] Members of TOP received exclusive global advertising rights for their product category, and use of the Olympic symbol, the interlocking rings, in their publications and advertisements.[121]Effect of televisionA Berliner Illustrirte Zeitung cartoon published during the 1936 Olympics in Berlin envisions the Olympics in 2000 when spectators would be replaced by television and radio with the cheers of spectators broadcast from loudspeakers; despite the prediction, spectators still watch the Olympic games in person and by globally-broadcast television coverage.The 1936 Summer Olympics in Berlin were the first Games to be broadcast on television, though only to local audiences.[122] The 1956 Winter Olympics in Italy were the first internationally televised Olympic Games,[123] and the broadcasting rights for the following Winter Games in California were sold for the first time to specialised television broadcasting networks\u2014CBS paid US$394,000 for the American rights.[124][118] In the following decades, the Olympics became one of the ideological fronts of the Cold War, and the International Olympic Committee wanted to take advantage of this heightened interest via the broadcast medium.[124] The sale of broadcast rights enabled the IOC to increase the exposure of the Olympic Games, thereby generating more interest, which in turn enhanced the appeal of TV air time to the advertisers. This cycle allowed the IOC to charge ever-increasing fees for those rights.[124] For example, CBS paid US$375\u00a0million for the American broadcast rights for the 1998 Nagano Games,[125] while NBC spent US$3.5\u00a0billion for the American rights to air every Olympic Games from 2000 to 2012.[118]In 2011, NBC agreed to a $4.38\u00a0billion contract with the IOC to broadcast the Olympics through the 2020 Games, the most expensive television rights deal in Olympic history.[126] NBC then agreed to a $7.75\u00a0billion contract extension on 7 May 2014, to air the Olympics through the 2032 Games.[127] NBC also acquired the American television rights to the Youth Olympic Games, beginning in 2014,[128] and the Paralympic Games.[129] More than half of the Olympic Committee's global sponsors are American companies,[130] and NBC is one of the major sources of revenue for the IOC.[130]Viewership increased exponentially from the 1960s until the end of the 20th century. This was due to the advent of satellites for broadcasting live television worldwide starting in 1964, and the introduction of colour television in 1968.[131] The global audience for the 1968 Mexico City Games was estimated to be 600\u00a0million, whereas the audience numbers at the Los Angeles Games of 1984 had increased to 900\u00a0million; this number had swelled to 3.5\u00a0billion by the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona.[132][133][134][135][136] With such high costs charged to broadcast the Games, the added pressure of the internet, and increased competition from cable, the television lobby demanded concessions from the IOC to boost ratings. The IOC responded by making a number of changes to the Olympic programme; at the Summer Games, the gymnastics competition was expanded from seven to nine nights, and a Champions Gala was added to attract greater interest;[137] the events programmes were also expanded for swimming and diving, both popular sports with a broad base of television viewers.[137] Due to the substantial fees NBC has paid for rights to the Olympics, the IOC has allowed the network to influence the event scheduling to maximise U.S. television ratings when possible.[138][135][139][140] Notable examples of maximizing U.S. television viewership include scheduling the finals of the swimming events only during the mornings of the host cities Beijing (during the 2008 Summer Olympics) and Tokyo (during the 2020 Summer Olympics), which coincide with the evening prime time broadcast slots of the United States.[141][142][143][144][145]Olympic marketingThe sale of the Olympic brand has been controversial. The argument is that the Games have become indistinguishable from any other commercialised sporting spectacle.[121][146][146] Another criticism is that the Games are funded by host cities and national governments; the IOC incurs none of the cost, yet controls all the rights and profits from the Olympic symbols. The IOC also takes a percentage of all sponsorship and broadcast income.[121] Host cities continue to compete ardently for the right to host the Games, even though there is no certainty that they will earn back their investments.[147] Research has shown that trade is around 30 percent higher for countries that have hosted the Olympics.[148]SymbolsMain article: Olympic symbolsThe Olympic flagThe Olympic Movement uses symbols to represent the ideals embodied in the Olympic Charter. The Olympic symbol, better known as the Olympic rings, consists of five intertwined rings and represents the unity of the five inhabited continents (Africa, The Americas (is considered one continent), Asia, Europe, and Oceania). The coloured version of the rings\u2014blue, yellow, black, green, and red\u2014over a white field forms the Olympic flag. These colours were chosen because every nation had at least one of them on its national flag. The flag was adopted in 1914 but flown for the first time only at the 1920 Summer Olympics in Antwerp, Belgium. It has since been hoisted during each celebration of the Games.[149][150]The Olympic motto, Citius, Altius, Fortius, a Latin expression meaning \"Faster, Higher, Stronger\" was proposed by Pierre de Coubertin in 1894 and has been official since 1924. The motto was coined by Coubertin's friend, the Dominican priest Henri Didon OP, for a Paris youth gathering of 1891.[151]Coubertin's Olympic ideals are expressed in the Olympic creed:The most important thing in the Olympic Games is not to win but to take part, just as the most important thing in life is not the triumph but the struggle. The essential thing is not to have conquered but to have fought well.[149]Months before each Games, the Olympic Flame is lit at the Temple of Hera in Olympia in a ceremony that reflects ancient Greek rituals. A female performer, acting as a priestess joined by ten female performers as Vestal Virgins, ignites a torch by placing it inside a parabolic mirror which focuses the sun's rays; she then lights the torch of the first relay bearer (who also is a Greek athlete), thus initiating the Olympic torch relay that will carry the flame to the host city's Olympic stadium, where it plays an important role in the opening ceremony.[152] Though the flame has been an Olympic symbol since 1928, the torch relay was only introduced at the 1936 Summer Games to promote the Third Reich.[149][153]The Olympic mascot, an animal or human figure representing the cultural heritage of the host country, was introduced in 1968. It has played an important part of the Games' identity promotion since the 1980 Summer Olympics, when the Soviet bear cub Misha reached international stardom. The mascot of the Summer Olympics in London was named Wenlock after the town of Much Wenlock in Shropshire. Much Wenlock still hosts the Wenlock Olympian Games, which were an inspiration to Pierre de Coubertin for the Olympic Games.[154]CeremoniesMain article: Olympic Games ceremonyOpening ceremonyOpening ceremony of the 2020 Summer Olympics in TokyoAs mandated by the Olympic Charter, various elements frame the opening ceremony of the Olympic Games. This ceremony takes place on a Friday and is held prior to the commencement of the sporting events (apart from some group-stage football matches, softball games, and rowing heats).[155][156] Most of the rituals for the opening ceremony were established at the 1920 Summer Olympics in Antwerp.[157] The ceremony typically starts with the entrance of the president of the International Olympic Committee and a representative of the host country followed by the hoisting of the host country's flag and a performance of its national anthem.[155][156] The host nation then presents artistic displays of music, singing, dance, and theatre representative of its culture.[157] The artistic presentations have grown in scale and complexity as successive hosts attempt to provide a ceremony that outlasts its predecessor's in terms of memorability. The opening ceremony of the Beijing Games reportedly cost $100\u00a0million, with much of the cost incurred in the artistic segment.[158]After the artistic portion of the ceremony, the athletes parade into the stadium grouped by nation. Greece is traditionally the first nation to enter and leads the parade in order to honour the origins of the Olympics. Nations then enter the stadium alphabetically according to the host country's chosen language, with the host country's athletes being the last to enter. During the 2004 Summer Olympics, which was hosted in Athens, Greece, the Greek flag entered the stadium first, while the Greek delegation entered last. Beginning with the 2020 Summer Olympics, the succeeding hosts of the respective Olympic Games (summer or winter) will enter immediately before the current host in descending order. Speeches are given by the President of the Organizing Committee, the IOC president, and the head of state/representative of the host country, formally opening the Games. Finally, the Olympic torch is brought into the stadium and passed on until it reaches the final torch carrier, often a successful Olympic athlete from the host nation, who lights the Olympic flame in the stadium's cauldron.[155][156]Closing ceremonyAthletes gather in the stadium during the closing ceremony of the 2008 Summer Olympics in BeijingThe closing ceremony of the Olympic Games takes place on a Sunday and after all sporting events have concluded. Flag-bearers from each participating country enter the stadium, followed by the athletes who enter together, without any national distinction.[159] Three national flags are hoisted while the corresponding national anthems are played: the flag of the current host country; the flag of Greece, to honour the birthplace of the Olympic Games; and the flag of the country hosting the next Summer or Winter Olympic Games.[159] The president of the organising committee and the IOC president make their closing speeches, the Games are officially closed, and the Olympic flame is extinguished.[160] In what is known as the Antwerp Ceremony, the current mayor of the city that organised the Games transfers a special Olympic flag to the president of the IOC, who then passes it on to the current mayor of the city hosting the next Olympic Games.[161] The next host nation then also briefly introduces itself with artistic displays of dance and theatre representative of its culture.[159]As is customary, the last medal presentation of the Games is held as part of the closing ceremony. Typically, the marathon medals are presented at the Summer Olympics,[159][162] while the cross-country skiing mass start medals are awarded at the Winter Olympics.[163]Medal presentationA medal ceremony at the 2008 Summer Olympics with (from left to right): the Danish flag, the Union Flag of the UK, and the New Zealand flagA medal ceremony is held after the conclusion of each Olympic event. The winner, and the second- and third-place competitors or teams, stand on top of a three-tiered rostrum to be awarded their respective medals by a member of the IOC.[164] After the medals have been received, the national flags of the three medallists are raised while the national anthem of the gold medallist's country is played.[165] Volunteering citizens of the host country also act as hosts during the medal ceremonies, assisting the officials who present the medals and acting as flag-bearers.[166] In the Summer Olympics, each medal ceremony is held at the venue where the event has taken place,[167] but the ceremonies at the Winter Olympics are usually held in a special \"plaza\".[168]The practice of awarding Olympic medals at podium ceremonies was established at the 1932 Winter Olympics, based on pedestals used at the 1930 British Empire Games, as proposed by Melville Marks Robinson.[169]SportsMain article: Olympic sportsThe Olympic Games programme consists of 35 sports, 30 disciplines and 408 events. For example, wrestling is a Summer Olympic sport, comprising two disciplines: Greco-Roman and Freestyle. It is further broken down into fourteen events for men and four events for women, each representing a different weight class.[170] The Summer Olympics programme includes 26 sports, while the Winter Olympics programme features 15 sports.[171] Athletics, swimming, fencing, and artistic gymnastics are the only summer sports that have never been absent from the Olympic programme. Cross-country skiing, figure skating, ice hockey, Nordic combined, ski jumping, and speed skating have been featured at every Winter Olympics programme since its inception in 1924. Current Olympic sports, like badminton, basketball, and volleyball, first appeared on the programme as demonstration sports, and were later promoted to full Olympic sports. Some sports that were featured in earlier Games were later dropped from the programme.[172]Olympic sports are governed by international sports federations (IFs) recognised by the IOC as the global supervisors of those sports. There are 35 federations represented at the IOC.[173] There are sports recognised by the IOC that are not included in the Olympic programme. These sports are not considered Olympic sports, but they can be promoted to this status during a programme revision that occurs in the first IOC session following a celebration of the Olympic Games.[174][175] During such revisions, sports can be excluded or included in the programme on the basis of a two-thirds majority vote of the members of the IOC.[176] There are recognised sports that have never been on an Olympic programme in any capacity, for example, orienteering.[177]In October and November 2004, the IOC established an Olympic Programme Commission, which was tasked with reviewing the sports on the Olympic programme and all non-Olympic recognised sports. The goal was to apply a systematic approach to establishing the Olympic programme for each celebration of the Games.[178] The commission formulated seven criteria to judge whether a sport should be included on the Olympic programme.[178] These criteria are history and tradition of the sport, universality, popularity of the sport, image, athletes' health, development of the International Federation that governs the sport, and costs of holding the sport.[178] From this study five recognised sports emerged as candidates for inclusion at the 2012 Summer Olympics: golf, karate, rugby sevens, roller sports and squash.[178] These sports were reviewed by the IOC Executive Board and then referred to the General Session in Singapore in July 2005. Of the five sports recommended for inclusion only two were selected as finalists: karate and squash.[178] Neither sport attained the required two-thirds vote and consequently they were not promoted to the Olympic programme.[178] In October 2009 the IOC voted to instate golf and rugby sevens as Olympic sports for the 2016 and 2020 Summer Olympic Games.[179]The 114th IOC Session, in 2002, limited the Summer Games programme to a maximum of 28 sports, 301 events, and 10,500 athletes.[178] Three years later, at the 117th IOC Session, the first major programme revision was performed, which resulted in the exclusion of baseball and softball from the official programme of the 2012 London Games. Since there was no agreement in the promotion of two other sports, the 2012 programme featured just 26 sports.[178] The 2016 and 2020 Games will return to the maximum of 28 sports given the addition of rugby and golf.[179]Amateurism and professionalismFurther information: Amateur sportsThe Gold medal game between Russia and Czech Republic at the 1998 Winter Olympics; professional NHL players have been permitted to participate in ice hockey since then.The ethos of the aristocracy as exemplified in the English public school greatly influenced Pierre de Coubertin.[180] The public schools subscribed to the belief that sport formed an important part of education, an attitude summed up in the saying mens sana in corpore sano, a sound mind in a sound body. In this ethos, a gentleman was one who became an all-rounder, not the best at one specific thing. There was also a prevailing concept of fairness, in which practising or training was considered tantamount to cheating.[180] Those who practised a sport professionally were considered to have an unfair advantage over those who practised it merely as a hobby.[180]The exclusion of professionals caused several controversies throughout the history of the modern Olympics. The 1912 Olympic pentathlon and decathlon champion Jim Thorpe was stripped of his medals when it was discovered that he had played semi-professional baseball before the Olympics. His medals were posthumously restored by the IOC in 1983 after a ruling found that the decision to strip him of his medals fell outside of the 30-day period.[181] Swiss and Austrian skiers boycotted the 1936 Winter Olympics in support of their skiing teachers, who were not allowed to compete because they earned money with their sport and were thus considered professionals.[182]The advent of the state-sponsored \"full-time amateur athlete\" of the Eastern Bloc countries eroded the ideology of the pure amateur, as it put the self-financed amateurs of the Western countries at a disadvantage. The Soviet Union entered teams of athletes who were all nominally students, soldiers, or working in a profession, but all of whom were in reality paid by the state to train on a full-time basis.[183][184][180] The situation greatly disadvantaged American and Western European athletes, and was a major factor in the decline of American medal hauls in the 1970s and 1980s.[185] As a result, the Olympics shifted away from amateurism, as envisioned by Pierre de Coubertin, to allowing participation of professional athletes,[186] but only in the 1990s, after the collapse of the Soviet Union and its influence within the International Olympic Committee.[187][188][189]Team Canada ice hockey disputeNear the end of the 1960s, the Canadian Amateur Hockey Association (CAHA) felt their amateur players could no longer be competitive against the Soviet team's full-time athletes and the other constantly improving European teams. They pushed for the ability to use players from professional leagues but met opposition from the IIHF and IOC. At the IIHF Congress in 1969, the IIHF decided to allow Canada to use nine non-NHL professional hockey players[190] at the 1970 World Championships in Montreal and Winnipeg, Canada.[191] The decision was reversed in January 1970 after Brundage said that ice hockey's status as an Olympic sport would be in jeopardy if the change was made.[190] In response, Canada withdrew from international ice hockey competition and officials stated that they would not return until \"open competition\" was instituted.[190][192] G\u00fcnther Sabetzki became president of the IIHF in 1975 and helped to resolve the dispute with the CAHA. In 1976, the IIHF agreed to allow \"open competition\" between all players in the World Championships. However, NHL players were still not allowed to play in the Olympics until 1988, because of the IOC's amateur-only policy.[193]ControversiesMain article: List of Olympic Games scandals and controversiesBoycottsMain article: List of Olympic Games boycottsCountries that boycotted the 1956 Summer Olympics (shaded blue)Countries that boycotted the 1964 Summer Olympics (shaded red)Countries that boycotted the 1976 Summer Olympics (shaded blue)Countries that boycotted the 1980 Summer Olympics (shaded blue)Countries that boycotted the 1984 Summer Olympics (shaded blue)Greece, Australia, France, and United Kingdom are the only countries to be represented at every Olympic Games since their inception in 1896. While countries sometimes miss an Olympics due to a lack of qualified athletes, some choose to boycott a celebration of the Games for various reasons. The Olympic Council of Ireland boycotted the 1936 Berlin Games, because the IOC insisted its team needed to be restricted to the Irish Free State rather than representing the entire island of Ireland.[194]There were three boycotts of the 1956 Melbourne Olympics: the Netherlands, Spain, and Switzerland refused to attend because of the repression of the Hungarian uprising by the Soviet Union, but did send an equestrian delegation to Stockholm; Cambodia, Egypt, Iraq, and Lebanon boycotted the Games because of the Suez Crisis; and the People's Republic of China boycotted the Games due to the participation of the Republic of China, composed of athletes coming from Taiwan.[195]In 1972 and 1976 a large number of African countries threatened the IOC with a boycott to force them to ban South Africa and Rhodesia, because of their segregationist rule. New Zealand was also one of the African boycott targets, because its national rugby union team had toured apartheid-ruled South Africa. The IOC conceded in the first two cases, but refused to ban New Zealand on the grounds that rugby was not an Olympic sport.[196] Fulfilling their threat, twenty African countries were joined by Guyana and Iraq in a withdrawal from the Montreal Games, after a few of their athletes had already competed.[196][197]The Republic of China (Taiwan) was excluded from the 1976 Games by order of Pierre Elliott Trudeau, the prime minister of Canada. Trudeau's action was widely condemned as having brought shame on Canada for having succumbed to political pressure to keep the Chinese delegation from competing under its name.[198] The ROC refused a proposed compromise that would have still allowed them to use the ROC flag and anthem as long as the name was changed.[199] Athletes from Taiwan did not participate again until 1984, when they returned under the name of Chinese Taipei and with a special flag and anthem.[200]In 1980 and 1984, the Cold War opponents boycotted each other's Games. The United States and sixty-five other countries boycotted the Moscow Olympics in 1980 because of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. This boycott reduced the number of nations participating to 80, the lowest number since 1956.[201] The Soviet Union and 15 other nations countered by boycotting the Los Angeles Olympics of 1984. Although a boycott led by the Soviet Union depleted the field in certain sports, 140 National Olympic Committees took part, which was a record at the time.[5] The fact that Romania, a Warsaw Pact country, opted to compete despite Soviet demands led to a warm reception of the Romanian team by the United States. When the Romanian athletes entered during the opening ceremonies, they received a standing ovation from the spectators, which comprised mostly U.S. citizens. The boycotting nations of the Eastern Bloc staged their own alternate event, the Friendship Games, in July and August.[202][203]There had been growing calls for boycotts of Chinese goods and the 2008 Olympics in Beijing in protest of China's human rights record, and in response to Tibetan disturbances. Ultimately, no nation supported a boycott.[204][205] In August 2008, the government of Georgia called for a boycott of the 2014 Winter Olympics, set to be held in Sochi, Russia, in response to Russia's participation in the 2008 South Ossetia war.[206][207] Continuing human rights violations in China have led to \"diplomatic boycotts\", where athletes still compete at the Games but diplomats do not attend, of the 2022 Winter Olympics in Beijing by several countries, most notably the United States.[208][209]PoliticsJesse Owens on the podium after winning the long jump at the 1936 Summer Olympics, where he won four Gold medals; in his 1980 obituary, The New York Times called him \"perhaps the greatest and most famous athlete in track and field history\".[210]Gold medalist Tommie Smith (center) and bronze medalist John Carlos (right) showing the raised fist on the podium after the 200\u00a0m race at the 1968 Summer Olympics; both wear Olympic Project for Human Rights badges. Peter Norman (silver medalist, left) from Australia also wears an OPHR badge in solidarity with Smith and Carlos.The Olympic Games have been used as a platform to promote political ideologies almost from its inception. Nazi Germany wished to portray the National Socialist Party as benevolent and peace-loving when they hosted the 1936 Games, though they used the Games to display Aryan superiority.[211] Germany was the most successful nation at the Games, which did much to support their allegations of Aryan supremacy, but notable victories by African American Jesse Owens, who won four gold medals, and Hungarian Jew Ibolya Cs\u00e1k, blunted the message.[212] The Soviet Union did not participate until the 1952 Summer Olympics in Helsinki. Instead, starting in 1928, the Soviets organised an international sports event called Spartakiads. During the interwar period of the 1920s and 1930s, communist and socialist organisations in several countries, including the United States, attempted to counter what they called the \"bourgeois\" Olympics with the Workers Olympics.[213][214] It was not until the 1956 Summer Games that the Soviets emerged as a sporting superpower and, in doing so, took full advantage of the publicity that came with winning at the Olympics.[215] Soviet Union's success might be attributed to a heavy state's investment in sports to fulfill its political agenda on an international stage.[216][184]Individual athletes have also used the Olympic stage to promote their own political agenda. At the 1968 Summer Olympics in Mexico City, two American track and field athletes, Tommie Smith and John Carlos, who finished first and third in the 200\u00a0metres, performed the Black Power salute on the victory stand. The second-place finisher, Peter Norman of Australia, wore an Olympic Project for Human Rights badge in support of Smith and Carlos. In response to the protest, IOC president Avery Brundage ordered Smith and Carlos suspended from the US team and banned from the Olympic Village. When the US Olympic Committee refused, Brundage threatened to ban the entire US track team. This threat led to the expulsion of the two athletes from the Games.[217] In another notable incident in the gymnastics competition, while standing on the medal podium after the balance beam event final, in which Natalia Kuchinskaya of the Soviet Union had controversially taken the gold, Czechoslovakian gymnast V\u011bra \u010c\u00e1slavsk\u00e1 quietly turned her head down and away during the playing of the Soviet national anthem. The action was \u010c\u00e1slavsk\u00e1's silent protest against the recent Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia. Her protest was repeated when she accepted her medal for her floor exercise routine when the judges changed the preliminary scores of the Soviet Larisa Petrik to allow her to tie with \u010c\u00e1slavsk\u00e1 for the gold. While \u010c\u00e1slavsk\u00e1's countrymen supported her actions and her outspoken opposition to Communism (she had publicly signed and supported Ludvik Vaculik's \"Two Thousand Words\" manifesto), the new regime responded by banning her from both sporting events and international travel for many years and made her an outcast from society until the fall of communism.Currently, the government of Iran has taken steps to avoid any competition between its athletes and those from Israel. An Iranian judoka, Arash Miresmaeili, did not compete in a match against an Israeli during the 2004 Summer Olympics. Although he was officially disqualified for being overweight, Miresmaeli was awarded US$125,000 in prize money by the Iranian government, an amount paid to all Iranian gold medal winners. He was officially cleared of intentionally avoiding the bout, but his receipt of the prize money raised suspicion.[218]In 2022, in the wake of the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the IOC Executive Board \"recommends no participation of Russian and Belarusian athletes and officials, urges International Sports Federations and organizers of sports events worldwide to do everything in their power to ensure that no athlete or sports official from Russia or Belarus be allowed to take part under the name of Russia or Belarus.\"[219]Use of performance-enhancing drugsMain article: Use of performance-enhancing drugs in the Olympic GamesThomas Hicks running the marathon at the 1904 Olympics in St. LouisIn the early 20th century, many Olympic athletes began using drugs to improve their athletic abilities. For example, in 1904, Thomas Hicks, a gold medallist in the marathon, was given strychnine by his coach (at the time, taking different substances was allowed, as there was no data regarding the effect of these substances on a body of an athlete).[220] The only Olympic death linked to performance enhancing occurred at the 1960 Summer Olympics in Rome. A Danish cyclist, Knud Enemark Jensen, fell from his bicycle and later died. A coroner's inquiry found that he was under the influence of amphetamines.[221] By the mid-1960s, sports federations started to ban the use of performance-enhancing drugs; in 1967 the IOC followed suit.[222]According to British journalist Andrew Jennings, a KGB colonel stated that the agency's officers had posed as anti-doping authorities from the International Olympic Committee to undermine doping tests and that Soviet athletes were \"rescued with [these] tremendous efforts\".[223] On the topic of the 1980 Summer Olympics, a 1989 Australian study said \"There is hardly a medal winner at the Moscow Games, certainly not a gold medal winner, who is not on one sort of drug or another: usually several kinds. The Moscow Games might as well have been called the Chemists' Games.\"[223]In 2016, documents obtained revealed the Soviet Union's plans for a statewide doping system in track and field in preparation for the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles. Dated prior to the country's decision to boycott the Games, the document detailed the existing steroids operations of the program, along with suggestions for further enhancements.[224] The communication, directed to the Soviet Union's head of track and field, was prepared by Sergei Portugalov of the Institute for Physical Culture. Portugalov was also one of the main figures involved in the implementation of the Russian doping programme prior to the 2016 Summer Olympics.[224]The first Olympic athlete to test positive for the use of performance-enhancing drugs was Hans-Gunnar Liljenwall, a Swedish pentathlete at the 1968 Summer Olympics, who lost his bronze medal for alcohol use.[225] One of the most publicised doping-related disqualifications occurred after the 1988 Summer Olympics where Canadian sprinter Ben Johnson (who won the 100-metre dash) tested positive for stanozolol.[226]In 1999, the IOC formed the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) in an effort to systematise the research and detection of performance-enhancing drugs. There was a sharp increase in positive drug tests at the 2000 Summer Olympics and 2002 Winter Olympics due to improved testing conditions. Several medallists in weightlifting and cross-country skiing from post-Soviet states were disqualified because of doping offences. The IOC-established drug testing regimen (now known as the Olympic Standard) has set the worldwide benchmark that other sporting federations attempt to emulate.[227] During the Beijing games, 3,667 athletes were tested by the IOC under the auspices of the World Anti-Doping Agency. Both urine and blood tests were used to detect banned substances.[221][228] In London over 6,000 Olympic and Paralympic athletes were tested. Prior to the Games 107 athletes tested positive for banned substances and were not allowed to compete.[229][230][231]Russian doping scandalThis article appears to be slanted towards recent events. Please try to keep recent events in historical perspective and add more content related to non-recent events. (December 2022)Further information: Doping in Russia, McLaren Report, Russia at the 2012 Summer Olympics \u00a7\u00a0Russian doping scandal, Russia at the 2014 Winter Olympics, Russia at the 2016 Summer Olympics, Olympic Athletes from Russia at the 2018 Winter Olympics, and Oswald CommissionDoping in Russian sports has a systemic nature. Russia has had 44 Olympic medals stripped for doping violations \u2013 the most of any country, and more than a quarter of the global total. From 2011 to 2015, more than a thousand Russian competitors in various sports, including summer, winter, and Paralympic sports, benefited from a cover-up.[232][233][234][235] Russia was partially banned from the 2016 Summer Olympics and was banned from the 2018 Winter Olympics (while being allowed to participate as the Olympic Athletes from Russia) due to the state-sponsored doping programme.[236][237]In December 2019, Russia was banned for four years from all major sporting events for systematic doping and lying to WADA.[238] The ban was issued by WADA on 9\u00a0December 2019, and the Russian anti-doping agency RUSADA had 21\u00a0days to make an appeal to the Court of Arbitration for Sport (CAS). The ban meant that Russian athletes would only be allowed to compete under the Olympic flag after passing anti-doping tests.[239] Russia appealed the decision to the CAS.[240] The CAS, on review of Russia's appeal of its case from WADA, ruled on 17 December 2020, to reduce the penalty that WADA had placed. Instead of banning Russia from sporting events, the ruling allowed Russia to participate at the Olympics and other international events, but for a period of two years, the team cannot use the Russian name, flag, or anthem and must present themselves as \"Neutral Athlete\" or \"Neutral Team\". The ruling does allow for team uniforms to display \"Russia\" on the uniform as well as the use of the Russian flag colors within the uniform's design, although the name should be up to equal predominance as the \"Neutral Athlete/Team\" designation.[241]In February 2022, during the Beijing Olympics, the international news media reported on 9 February that the issue of doping was again raised over a positive test for trimetazidine by the ROC's Kamila Valieva,[242][243] which was officially confirmed on 11 February.[244] Valieva's sample in question was taken by the Russian Anti-Doping Agency (RUSADA) at the 2022 Russian Figure Skating Championships on 25 December, but the sample was not analyzed at the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) laboratory where it was sent for testing until 8 February, one day after the team event concluded.[245] The Court of Arbitration for Sport (CAS) is expected to hear the case on 13 February with a decision scheduled for announcement on 14 February ahead of her scheduled appearance in the women's singles event beginning 15 February.[246][247] Due to Valieva being a minor at the time, as well as being classified as a \"protected person\" under WADA guidelines, RUSADA and the IOC announced on 12 February that they would broaden the scope of their respective investigations to include members of her entourage (e.g. coaches, team doctors, etc.).[248] By the end of the Beijing Olympics, a total five athletes were reported for doping violations.[249] A decision by RUSADA was issued in mid-October, which was endorsed by WADA, stating that the details of the Valieva hearing and its scheduled dates would be placed under international guidelines for the protection of minors (Valieva was 15 years old when the positive test results were disclosed) and not to be disclosed publicly.[250] Although Russia as a country is currently banned from participating in international skating events due to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, Valieva has continued to compete within Russian borders without being hindered by RUSADA as recently as the Russian Grand Prix held in October 2022.[251] In mid-November, WADA requested that CAS take up the review of the Valieva case with an eye towards a 4-year suspension of Valieva, which would exclude her from competition at the next Winter Olympics, and to rescind her first-place performance at the previous Beijing Olympics because, \"the Russian Anti-Doping Agency (RUSADA) did not meet a WADA-imposed Nov. 4 deadline to deliver a verdict on Valiyeva's case.\"[252]Sex discriminationMain article: Participation of women in the OlympicsCharlotte Cooper of the United Kingdom, the first female Olympic champion, in the 1900 GamesWomen were first allowed to compete at the 1900 Summer Olympics in Paris, but at the 1992 Summer Olympics 35 countries were still only fielding all-male delegations.[253] This number dropped rapidly over the following years. In 2000, Bahrain sent two women competitors for the first time: Fatema Hameed Gerashi and Mariam Mohamed Hadi Al Hilli.[254] In 2004, Robina Muqimyar and Fariba Rezayee became the first women to compete for Afghanistan at the Olympics.[255] In 2008, the United Arab Emirates sent female athletes for the first time; Maitha Al Maktoum competed in taekwondo, and Latifa Al Maktoum in equestrian. Both athletes were from Dubai's ruling family.[256]By 2010, only three countries had never sent female athletes to the Games: Brunei, Saudi Arabia, and Qatar. Brunei had taken part in only three celebrations of the Games, sending a single athlete on each occasion, but Saudi Arabia and Qatar had been competing regularly with all-male teams. In 2010, the International Olympic Committee announced it would \"press\" these countries to enable and facilitate the participation of women for the 2012 Summer Olympics in London. Anita DeFrantz, chair of the IOC's Women and Sports Commission, suggested that countries be barred if they prevented women from competing. Shortly thereafter, the Qatar Olympic Committee announced that it \"hoped to send up to four female athletes in shooting and fencing\" to the 2012 Summer Games.[257]In 2008, Ali Al-Ahmed, director of the Institute for Gulf Affairs, likewise called for Saudi Arabia to be barred from the Games, describing its ban on women athletes as a violation of the International Olympic Committee charter. He noted: \"For the last 15 years, many international nongovernmental organisations worldwide have been trying to lobby the IOC for better enforcement of its own laws banning gender discrimination.\u00a0 While their efforts did result in increasing numbers of women Olympians, the IOC has been reluctant to take a strong position and threaten the discriminating countries with suspension or expulsion.\"[253] In July 2010, The Independent reported: \"Pressure is growing on the International Olympic Committee to kick out Saudi Arabia, who are likely to be the only major nation not to include women in their Olympic team for 2012.\u00a0... Should Saudi Arabia\u00a0... send a male-only team to London, we understand they will face protests from equal rights and women's groups which threaten to disrupt the Games\".[258]At the 2012 Summer Olympics, every participating nation included female athletes for the first time in Olympic history.[259] Saudi Arabia included two female athletes in its delegation; Qatar, four; and Brunei, one (Maziah Mahusin, in the 400\u00a0m hurdles). Qatar made one of its first female Olympians, Bahiya al-Hamad (shooting), its flagbearer at the 2012 Games,[260] and runner Maryam Yusuf Jamal of Bahrain became the first Gulf female athlete to win a medal when she won a bronze for her showing in the 1500\u00a0m race.[261]The only sport on the Olympic programme that features men and women competing together is the equestrian disciplines. There is no \"Women's Eventing\", or \"Men's Dressage\". As of 2008, there were still more medal events for men than women. With the addition of women's boxing to the programme in the 2012 Summer Olympics, however, women athletes were able to compete in all the sports open to men.[262] In the winter Olympics, women are still unable to compete in the Nordic combined.[263] There are currently two Olympic events in which male athletes may not compete: synchronised swimming and rhythmic gymnastics.[264]War and terrorismThe world wars caused three Olympiads to pass without a celebration of the Games: the 1916 Games were cancelled because of World War\u00a0I, and the summer and winter games of 1940 and 1944 were cancelled because of World War\u00a0II. The Russo-Georgian War between Georgia and Russia erupted on the opening day of the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing. Both President Bush and Prime Minister Putin were attending the Olympics at that time and spoke together about the conflict at a luncheon hosted by the Chinese president Hu Jintao.[265][266]Terrorism most directly affected the Olympic Games in 1972. When the Summer Games were held in Munich, Germany, eleven members of the Israeli Olympic team were taken hostage by the Palestinian terrorist group Black September in what is now known as the Munich massacre. The terrorists killed two of the athletes soon after taking them hostage and killed the other nine during a failed liberation attempt. A German police officer and five of the terrorists also died.[267] Following the selection of Barcelona, Spain, to host the 1992 Summer Olympics, the separatist ETA terrorist organisation launched attacks in the region, including the 1991 bombing in the Catalonian city of Vic that killed ten people.[268][269]Terrorism affected two Olympic Games held in the United States. During the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, a bomb was detonated at the Centennial Olympic Park, killing two people and injuring 111 others. The bomb was set by Eric Rudolph, an American domestic terrorist, who is serving a life sentence for the bombing.[270] The 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City took place just five months after the September 11 attacks, which meant a higher level of security than ever before provided for an Olympic Games. The opening ceremonies of the Games featured symbols relating to 9/11, including the flag that flew at Ground Zero and honour guards of NYPD and FDNY members.[271]CitizenshipIOC rules for citizenshipThe Olympic Charter requires that an athlete be a national of the country for which they compete. Dual nationals may compete for either country, as long as three years have passed since the competitor competed for the former country. However, if the NOCs and IF involved agree, then the IOC Executive Board may reduce or cancel this period.[272] This waiting period exists only for athletes who previously competed for one nation and want to compete for another. If an athlete gains a new or second nationality, then they do not need to wait any designated amount of time before participating for the new or second nation. The IOC is only concerned with issues of citizenship and nationality after individual nations have granted citizenship to athletes.[273]In October 2023, the IOC suspended the Russian Olympic Committee, and the suspension was upheld in February 2024 by the Court of Arbitration for Sport.[274] Without any NOC from Russia to approve a change of citizenship in under three years from Russia to another country, the IOC Executive Board approved changes of nationality in November 2023and March 2024 for a total of five athletes from Russia to another country, including Georgi Tiblov and Aleksandr Komarov in wrestling (from Russia to Serbia), Mikhail Yakolev in cycling (from Russia to Israel), and Anastasiia Kirpichnikova in swimming (from Russia to France).[275][276][277][278]Reasons for changing citizenshipOccasionally, an athlete will become a citizen of a different country to enable them to compete in the Olympics. This is often because they are attracted to sponsorship deals or training facilities in the other country, or the athlete might be unable to qualify from within their country of birth. In preparation for the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, the Russian Olympic Committee naturalised a South Korean-born short-track speed-skater, Ahn Hyun-soo, and an American-born snowboarder, Vic Wild. The two athletes won five gold medals and one bronze medal between them at the 2014 Games.[279]Champions and medallistsFurther information: Lists of Olympic medalists and List of multiple Olympic gold medalistsPaavo Nurmi, a Finnish middle-distance and long-distance runner, nicknamed the \"Flying Finn\" or the \"Phantom Finn\", set 22\u00a0official world records at distances between 1500\u00a0m and 20\u00a0km, winning nine golds and three silvers in his 12\u00a0events at the 1924 Summer Olympics.Medals are awarded to the athletes or teams who place first, second, and third in each event. The winners receive gold medals, which were solid gold until 1912, later made of gilded silver, and now gold-plated silver. Every gold medal must contain at least six grams of pure gold.[280] The runners-up are awarded silver medals and the third-place athletes receive bronze medals. In events contested by a single-elimination tournament (most notably boxing), third place might not be determined and the losers of both semi-finals each receive a bronze medal.At the 1896 Olympics, only the winner and runner-up of each event received medals\u2014silver for first and bronze for second, with no gold medals awarded. The current three-medal format was introduced at the 1904 Olympics.[281] From 1948 onward, athletes placing fourth, fifth, and sixth have received certificates, which came to be known officially as Olympic diplomas; from 1984, these have also been awarded to the seventh- and eighth-place finishers. At the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens, the gold, silver, and bronze medal winners were also presented with olive wreaths.[282] The IOC does not keep statistics of medals won on a national level (except for team sports), but the NOCs and the media record medal statistics and use them as a measure of each nation's success.[283]NationsParticipantsMain articles: List of participating nations at the Summer Olympic Games and List of participating nations at the Winter Olympic GamesAs of the 2020 Summer Games in Tokyo, all of the current 207 NOCs (and 19 obsolete NOCs) have participated in at least one edition of the Summer Olympics. Competitors from five nations\u2014Australia, France,[d] Great Britain,[e] Greece, and Switzerland[f]\u2014have competed in all 28 Summer Olympics. Athletes competing under the Olympic flag, Mixed Teams and the Refugee Team have competed at six Summer Olympics Games.A total of 119 NOCs (110 of the current 207 NOCs, and nine obsolete NOCs) have participated in at least one edition of the Winter Olympics. Competitors from 12 nations \u2014 Austria, Canada,Finland, France, Great Britain, Hungary, Italy, Norway, Poland, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United States \u2014 have participated in all 23 Winter Games to date.Host nations and citiesMain article: List of Olympic Games host citiesSee also: List of Olympic medals by host nationMap of Summer Olympics locations with countries that have hosted one Summer Olympics shaded in green and countries that have hosted two or more shaded in blueMap of Winter Olympics locations with countries that have hosted one Winter Olympics shaded in green and countries that have hosted two or more are shaded blueThe host city for an Olympic Games had historically been chosen seven to eight years ahead of their celebration. Beginning with the 2024 and 2028 Olympics selection process in 2017, the IOC has proceeded to announce the winning bid with a longer lead-in time in order to provide time for the winning cities/regions to prepare.[289][290] The process of selection is carried out in two phases that span a two-year period. The prospective host city applies to its country's National Olympic Committee; if more than one city from the same country submits a proposal to its NOC, the national committee typically holds an internal selection, since only one city per NOC can be presented to the International Olympic Committee for consideration. Once the deadline for submission of proposals by the NOCs is reached, the first phase (Application) begins with the applicant cities asked to complete a questionnaire regarding several key criteria related to the organisation of the Olympic Games.[291] In this form, the applicants must give assurances that they will comply with the Olympic Charter and with any other regulations established by the IOC Executive Committee.[289] The evaluation of the filled questionnaires by a specialised group provides the IOC with an overview of each applicant's project and their potential to host the Games. On the basis of this technical evaluation, the IOC Executive Board selects the applicants that will proceed to the candidature stage.[291]Once the candidate cities are selected, they must submit to the IOC a bigger and more detailed presentation of their project as part of a candidature file. Each city is thoroughly analysed by an evaluation commission. This commission will also visit the candidate cities, interviewing local officials and inspecting prospective venue sites, and submit a report on its findings one month prior to the IOC's final decision. During the interview process the candidate city must also guarantee that it will be able to fund the Games.[289] After the work of the evaluation commission, a list of candidates is presented to the General Session of the IOC, which must assemble in a country that does not have a candidate city in the running. The IOC members gathered in the Session have the final vote on the host city. Once elected, the host city bid committee (together with the NOC of the respective country) signs a Host City Contract with the IOC, officially becoming an Olympic host nation and host city.[289]By 2032, the Olympic Games will have been hosted by 47 cities in 23 countries. As of 2021, since the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul, South Korea, the Olympics have been held in Asia or Oceania four times, a sharp increase compared to the previous 92\u00a0years of modern Olympic history. The 2016 Games in Rio de Janeiro were the first Olympics for a South American country. No bids from countries in Africa have succeeded.[citation needed]See alsoOlympic Games portalModern history portalSports portalAll-time Olympic Games medal tableArt competitions at the Summer OlympicsList of multi-sport eventsOlympic Cup and Olympic OrderOlympic Day RunGlobal Association of International Sports FederationsNotes^ With English, French is the second official language of the Olympic Movement.^ However, Theodosius' decree contains no specific reference to Olympia.[23]^ The 1988 Winter Olympics were in Calgary, Canada, and the 1988 Winter Paralympics were in Innsbruck, Austria.[54]^ The IOC lists a French immigrant to the United States Albert Corey as a United States competitor for his marathon silver medal, but (together with four undisputed Americans) as part of a mixed team for the team race silver medal.[284][285]^ All three of Great Britain's athletes in 1904 were from Ireland, which at the time was part of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. Despite the team being called Great Britain or Team GB, inhabitants of Northern Ireland (and formerly the whole of Ireland) are (or were) eligible to join.[286]^ Switzerland participated in the equestrian events of the 1956 Games held in Stockholm in June,[287] but did not attend the Games in Melbourne later that year.[288]References^ \"Jeux Olympiques \u2013 Sports, Athl\u00e8tes, M\u00e9dailles, Rio 2016\". International Olympic Committee. 22 October 2018.^ \"Overview of Olympic Games\". Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica. Retrieved 4 June 2008.^ Archives, L. A. Times (14 October 1986). \"Olympics to Hold Events Every 2 Years\u00a0: Winter Games to Be Split Off, Start Own 4-Year Cycle in '94\". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 12 February 2024.^ Riding, Alan (12 February 1993). \"OLYMPICS: One Year to Lillehammer; '94 Olympics Are on Schedule Now That Budget Games Are Over\". The New York Times. ISSN\u00a00362-4331. Retrieved 12 February 2024.^ a b \"No Boycott Blues\". olympic.org. Retrieved 6 January 2017.^ \"International Olympic Committee - Tokyo 2020\".^ \"International Olympic Committee - Beijing 2022\".^ \u1f48\u03bb\u03cd\u03bc\u03c0\u03b9\u03b1. Liddell, Henry George; Scott, Robert; An Intermediate Greek\u2013English Lexicon at the Perseus Project.^ Swaddling 2000, p.\u00a054^ \"The Olympic Truce \u2013 Myth and Reality by Harvey Abrams\". Classics Technology Center, AbleMedia.com. Retrieved 12 February 2013.^ Young 2004, p.\u00a012.^ Pausanias, \"Elis 1\", VII, p. 7, 9, 10; Pindar, \"Olympian 10\", pp. 24\u201377^ Richardson 1992, p.\u00a0227.^ Young 2004, pp.\u00a012\u201313.^ Pausanias, \"Elis 1\", VII, p. 9; Pindar, \"Olympian 10\", pp. 24\u201377^ \"Olympic Games\". Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica. Retrieved 29 April 2009.^ Crowther 2007, pp.\u00a059\u201361.^ \"Ancient Olympic Events\". Perseus Project of Tufts University. Retrieved 29 April 2009.^ Golden 2009, p.\u00a024.^ Burkert 1983, p.\u00a095.^ Swaddling 1999, pp.\u00a090\u201393.^ Olympic Museum (2007). \"The Olympic Games in Antiquity\" (PDF). International Olympic Committee. p.\u00a02. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 March 2009. Retrieved 2 February 2009.^ a b Crowther 2007, p.\u00a054.^ 400 Years of Olimpick Passion, Robert Dover's Games Society, archived from the original on 6 June 2010, retrieved 4 June 2010^ a b \"Histoire et \u00e9volution des Jeux olympiques\". Potentiel (in French). 2005. Archived from the original on 26 April 2011. Retrieved 31 January 2009.^ Findling, John E. & Pelle, Kimberly P. (2004). Encyclopedia of the Modern Olympic Movement. London: Greenwood Press. ISBN\u00a00-275-97659-9^ Young 2004, p.\u00a0144.^ Young 1996, p.\u00a028.^ Matthews 2005, pp.\u00a053\u201354.^ Weiler 2004.^ Girginov & Parry 2005, p.\u00a038^ Young 1996, p.\u00a024.^ \"Much Wenlock & the Olympian Connection\". Wenlock Olympian Society. Archived from the original on 23 January 2009. Retrieved 31 January 2009.^ Young 1996, p.\u00a01.^ a b Young 1996, p.\u00a014.^ Young 1996, pp.\u00a02, 13\u201323, 81.^ Young 1996, p.\u00a044.^ a b \"Rugby School motivated founder of Games\". Sports Illustrated. 7 July 2004. Archived from the original on 23 August 2004. Retrieved 4 February 2009. {{cite magazine}}: Unknown parameter |agency= ignored (help)^ Coubertin et al. 1897, p.\u00a08, Part 2.^ Young 1996, pp.\u00a0100\u2013105.^ \"Athens 1896\". The International Olympic Committee. Retrieved 8 February 2010.^ Young 1996, p.\u00a0117.^ de Martens, Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric (1893). M\u00e9moire sur le conflit entre la Gr\u00e8ce et la Roumanie concernant l'affaire Zappa (in French). Athens: [printer Anestis Constantinides]. Retrieved 2 August 2017.^ Streit, Ge\u014drgios S. (1894). L'affaire Zappa; Conflit Gr\u00e9co-Roumain (in French). Paris: L. Larose. Retrieved 2 August 2017.^ a b Young 1996, p.\u00a0128.^ \"Olympic Games - a brief history | Parramatta History and Heritage\". historyandheritage.cityofparramatta.nsw.gov.au. Retrieved 31 January 2024.^ \"1896 Athina Summer Games\". Sports Reference. Archived from the original on 17 April 2020. Retrieved 31 January 2009.^ \"St. Louis 1904 \u2013 Overview\". ESPN. Archived from the original on 24 March 2021. Retrieved 31 January 2009.^ \"1906 Olympics mark 10th anniversary of the Olympic revival\". Canadian Broadcasting Centre. 28 May 2008. Archived from the original on 31 July 2008. Retrieved 31 January 2009.^ \"Chamonix 1924\". International Olympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2 August 2008. Retrieved 31 January 2009.^ \"Winter Olympics History\". Utah Athletic Foundation. Archived from the original on 12 January 2009. Retrieved 31 January 2009.^ Findling & Pelle 2004, p.\u00a0405.^ \"History of the Paralympics\". BBC Sport. 4 September 2008. Retrieved 2 February 2009.^ \"Innsbruck 1988 Paralympics \u2013 Ceremonies, Medals, Torch Relay\". International Paralympic Committee. Retrieved 2 August 2017.^ \"History of the Paralympic Games\". Government of Canada. Archived from the original on 12 March 2010. Retrieved 7 April 2010.^ \"IPC-IOC Cooperation\". paralympic.org. IPC. Archived from the original on 8 September 2009. Retrieved 3 May 2010.^ Gibson, Owen (4 May 2010). \"Sainsbury's announces sponsorship of 2012 Paralympics\". The Guardian. London.^ \"Rogge wants Youth Olympic Games\". BBC Sport. 19 March 2007. Retrieved 2 February 2009.^ Rice, John (5 July 2007). \"IOC approves Youth Olympics; first set for 2010\". USA Today. Associated Press. Retrieved 2 February 2009.^ \"Innsbruck is the host city for the first Winter Youth Olympic Games\". The Vancouver Organizing Committee for the 2010 Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games. 12 December 2008. Archived from the original on 10 June 2009. Retrieved 30 March 2009.^ \"IOC to Introduce Youth Olympic Games in 2010\". CRIenglish.com. 25 April 2007. Archived from the original on 9 August 2016. Retrieved 29 January 2009.^ \"IOC session: A \"go\" for Youth Olympic Games\". International Olympic Committee. 5 July 2007. Archived from the original on 21 August 2008. Retrieved 2 February 2009.^ Wade, Stephen (25 April 2007). \"No kidding: Teens to get Youth Olympic Games\". USA Today. Retrieved 27 August 2008.^ Michaelis, Vicky (5 July 2007). \"IOC votes to start Youth Olympics in 2010\". USA Today. Retrieved 2 February 2009.^ \"Tokyo 2020\". olympic.org. 23 February 2023. Retrieved 5 November 2023.^ \"Beijing to build convenient Olympic village\". The Beijing Organizing Committee for the Games of the XXIX Olympiad. Archived from the original on 14 September 2008. Retrieved 4 May 2009.^ \"Olympic Charter\" (PDF). International Olympic Committee. p.\u00a061. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 July 2011. Retrieved 28 July 2011.^ \"The Olympic Charter\". International Olympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2 May 2013. Retrieved 17 July 2012.^ \"Executive Board Concludes First Meeting of the New Year\". olympic.org. 13 January 2011. Retrieved 13 January 2011.^ \"Curtain comes down on 123rd IOC Session\". olympic.org. 9 July 2011. Archived from the original on 2 November 2011. Retrieved 3 July 2012.^ \"Working meeting between the IOC and the NOCs of the Netherlands Antilles, Aruba and the Netherlands\". olympic.org. 1 July 2011. Archived from the original on 15 January 2014. Retrieved 23 August 2012.^ Sudakov, Dmitry (8 June 2008). \"Beijing Olympics to cost China 44 billion dollars\". pravda.ru. Archived from the original on 22 February 2014. Retrieved 12 February 2014.^ Gibson, Owen (9 October 2013). \"Sochi 2014: the costliest Olympics yet but where has all the money gone?\". The Guardian. Retrieved 12 February 2014.^ a b c Flyvbjerg, Bent; Stewart, Allison; Budzier, Alexander (2016). The Oxford Olympics Study 2016: Cost and Cost Overrun at the Games. Sa\u00efd Business School, University of Oxford. arXiv:1607.04484. doi:10.2139/ssrn.2804554. S2CID\u00a0156794182. SSRN\u00a02804554.^ Abrahamson, Alan (25 July 2004). \"LA the Best Site, Bid Group Insists; Olympics: Despite USOC rejection\". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 5 November 2012. Retrieved 17 August 2008.^ Leahy, Joe (7 July 2016). \"Brazil's Olympic costs running 51% over budget, report warns\". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 23 July 2017.^ Flyvbjerg, Bent; Budzier, Alexander; Lunn, Daniel (1 September 2020). \"Regression to the Tail: Why the Olympics Blow Up\". Environment and Planning A: Economy and Space. arXiv:2009.14682. doi:10.2139/ssrn.3686009. S2CID\u00a0233759692. SSRN\u00a03686009.^ a b Cengel, Katya (10 August 2008). \"Olympics: beyond sports\". Courier Journal. Louisville, Kentucky. p.\u00a0E1.; Cengel, Katya (10 August 2008). \"Olympics (Continued from E1)\". Courier Journal. Louisville, Kentucky. p.\u00a0E2.^ \"Bob Barney\". Centre for Canadian Baseball Research. St. Mary's, Ontario. 2023. Retrieved 3 August 2023.^ \"Robert K. Barney\". Center for Sociocultural Sport and Olympic Research. 2020. Retrieved 4 August 2023.^ \"Robert K. Barney Graduate Student Essay Award\". Center for Sociocultural Sport and Olympic Research. 1 November 2022. Retrieved 5 August 2023.^ \"International Society of Olympic Historians\". International Society of Olympic Historians. 2023. Retrieved 1 October 2023.^ Greenwell M (August 2016). \"Olympics Everywhere\". Argument. WIRED (Paper). p.\u00a019. ...hosting the Olympics is almost always a financial disaster for cities in the long term.... Indeed, economists are uncommonly unanimous that hosting the Olympics is a bad bet.^ Rose AK, Spiegel MM (19 January 2011). \"The Olympic Effect\". The Economic Journal. 121 (553): 652\u201377. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0297.2010.02407.x.^ Tilcsik A, Marquis C (1 February 2013). \"Punctuated Generosity: How Mega-events and Natural Disasters Affect Corporate Philanthropy in U.S. Communities\" (PDF). Administrative Science Quarterly. 58 (1): 111\u201348. doi:10.1177/0001839213475800. S2CID\u00a018481039. SSRN\u00a02028982. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 September 2017 \u2013 via Social Science Research Network.^ Glynn, Mary Ann (2008). \"Configuring the Field of Play: How Hosting the Olympic Games Impacts Civic Community\". Journal of Management Studies. 45 (6): 1117\u20131146. doi:10.1111/j.1467-6486.2008.00785.x. S2CID\u00a0153973502.^ \"The Economic Impact Of The Winter Olympics: Not Great For Russia But Sochi Stands To Gain\". The Guardian. 17 December 2014. Retrieved 10 January 2014.^ Abend, Lisa (3 October 2014). \"Why Nobody Wants to Host the 2022 Winter Olympics\". Time. Retrieved 10 January 2014.^ \"Revealed: the biggest threat to the future of the Olympic Games\". The Guardian. 27 July 2016. Retrieved 30 July 2016.^ \"IOC makes historic decision by simultaneously awarding Olympic Games 2024 to Paris and 2028 to Los Angeles\". International Olympic Committee. 13 September 2017. Retrieved 6 September 2021.^ \"The Olympic Movement\". International Olympic Committee. Retrieved 2 May 2009.^ \"Roles and responsibilities during the Olympic Games\" (PDF). International Olympic Committee. February 2008. pp.\u00a01\u20132. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 April 2011. Retrieved 2 May 2009.^ \"For the Good of the Athletes\". The Beijing Organizing Committee for the Games of the XXIX Olympiad. 31 October 2007. Archived from the original on 23 January 2009. Retrieved 4 February 2009.^ \"National Olympic Committees\". olympic.org. Retrieved 13 March 2021. Click on \"What is a National Olympic Committee?\" (at top of page)^ \"South Sudan 206th NOC in the Olympic Movement\". eurolympic.org. 4 August 2015. Archived from the original on 13 March 2021. Retrieved 13 March 2021.^ \"Organising Committees for the Olympic Games\". Olympic Games. Retrieved 18 July 2012.^ Olympic Charter 2007, p.\u00a053, Rule 24.^ Maraniss 2008, pp.\u00a052\u201360.^ Maraniss 2008, pp.\u00a060\u201369.^ \"Samaranch Defends Nominating Son for IOC Post\". CBC.ca. 18 May 2001. Archived from the original on 5 December 2008. Retrieved 4 February 2009.^ Riding, Alan (30 June 1992). \"Olympics: Barcelona Profile; Samaranch, Under the Gun Shoots Back\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 12 November 2012. Retrieved 30 January 2009.^ \"Samaranch reflects on bid scandal with regret\". 2002 Winter Olympics coverage. Deseret News Archives. 19 May 2001. Archived from the original on 26 February 2002.^ a b \"Marketing Matters, Issue 21\" (PDF). stillmed.olympic.org. IOC. June 2002. Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 March 2018. Retrieved 20 October 2010.^ Jordan, Mary; Sullivan, Kevin (21 January 1999), \"Nagano Burned Documents Tracing '98 Olympics Bid\", Washington Post, pp.\u00a0A1, retrieved 20 August 2016^ Macintyre, Donald (1 February 1999). \"Japan's Sullied Bid\". Time Magazine. Retrieved 20 August 2016.^ Abrahamson, Alan; Wharton, David (30 July 2000). \"IOC: A tangled web of wealth, mystery\". St. Louis Post-Dispatch. St. Louis, Missouri. p.\u00a024.^ \"Sun sets on Salt Lake City\". Herald News. Passaic County, New Jersey. 25 February 2002. p.\u00a0A1.; \"Games (Continued From A1)\". Herald News. Passaic County, New Jersey. 25 February 2002. p.\u00a0A6.^ Rowlatt, Justin (29 July 2004). \"Buying the Games\". BBC News. Retrieved 16 April 2009.^ Zinser, Lynn (7 July 2005). \"London Wins 2012 Olympics; New York Lags\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 29 May 2015. Retrieved 4 February 2009.^ \"Paris Mayor Slams London Tactics\". Sporting Life. UK. Archived from the original on 15 May 2011. Retrieved 4 February 2009.^ Berkes, Howard (7 February 2006). \"How Turin got the Games\". NPR. Retrieved 4 February 2009.^ a b \"Olympic Marketing Fact File, 2011 Edition\" (PDF). olympic.org. p.\u00a018. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 August 2011. Retrieved 22 December 2015.^ Paul, Franklin (12 October 2007). \"Kodak to end Olympics sponsorship after 2008 games\". Reuters.^ \"No more Kodak moments in the Olympics\". disruptiveinnovation.se. 15 April 2013. Retrieved 23 November 2019.^ \"Wildly interesting facts about London you never knew, until now\". ITV News. 4 December 2015.^ \"The History of OXO\". oxo.co.uk. Archived from the original on 20 March 2018. Retrieved 23 November 2019.^ a b c d e f g Cooper-Chen 2005, p.\u00a0231.^ a b c d e \"Issues of the Olympic Games\". Olympic Primer. LA84 Foundation of Los Angeles. Archived from the original on 25 April 2009. Retrieved 30 March 2009.^ a b c Buchanon & Mallon 2006, p.\u00a0ci.^ a b Findling & Pelle 2004, p.\u00a0209.^ a b c Slack 2004, p.\u00a0194.^ \"Berlin 1936\". olympic.org. Archived from the original on 22 August 2008. Retrieved 31 March 2009.^ \"Cortina d'Ampezzo\". olympic.org. Archived from the original on 22 August 2008. Retrieved 31 March 2009.^ a b c Slack 2004, p.\u00a0192.^ Gershon 2000, p.\u00a017.^ Crupi, Anthony (7 June 2011). \"Update: NBC Bids $4.38 Billion for Olympic Gold\". Adweek. Retrieved 7 June 2011.^ Armour, Nancy (7 May 2014). \"NBC Universal pays $7.75 billion for Olympics through 2032\". USA Today.^ Zaccardi, Nick (12 August 2014). \"NBC Olympics, Universal Sports announce Youth Olympics coverage\". NBC Sports.^ Zaccardi, Nick (24 September 2013). \"NBC Olympics, U.S. Olympic Committee acquire media rights to Paralympics in 2014, 2016\". Olympictalk | NBC Sports.^ a b Draper, Kevin (7 December 2017). \"Fewer Russians Could Be a Windfall for U.S. Olympic Business\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 8 December 2017. Retrieved 5 February 2018.^ Whannel, Garry (1984). \"3. The television spectacular\". In Tomlinson, A.; Whannel, G. (eds.). Five-ring Circus: Money, Power, and Politics at the Olympic Games. London, UK: Pluto Press. pp.\u00a030\u201343. ISBN\u00a0978-0-86104-769-7.^ Tomlinson 2005, p.\u00a014.^ \"World Series TV ratings slump\". CBS News. Associated Press. 27 October 2000. Archived from the original on 31 October 2010. Retrieved 4 May 2009.^ Walters, John (2 October 2000). \"All Fall Down \u2013 Making sense of NBC's tumbling Olympic ratings\". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on 29 April 2011. Retrieved 2 April 2009.^ a b Carter, Bill; Sandomir, Richard (17 August 2008). \"A Surprise Winner at the Olympic Games in Beijing: NBC\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 1 September 2008. Retrieved 2 April 2009.^ Slack 2004, pp.\u00a016\u201318.^ a b Slack 2004, p.\u00a017.^ Cooper-Chen 2005, p.\u00a0230.^ Woods 2007, p.\u00a0146.^ \"London Olympics 2012 Ratings: Most Watched Event In TV History\". The Huffington Post. 13 August 2012. Retrieved 12 July 2013.^ \"Olympics 2021: Why swimming finals are being held in the morning\". au.sports.yahoo.com. 24 July 2021. Retrieved 22 February 2022.^ \"Here's Why the Swimming Finals Are Held in the Morning at Tokyo Olympics | Sports Illustrated\". www.si.com. 25 July 2021. Retrieved 22 February 2022.^ Coskrey, Jason (28 July 2021). \"Morning finals forcing swimmers to adjust in Tokyo\". The Japan Times. Archived from the original on 22 February 2022. Retrieved 22 February 2022.^ Carter, Bill (24 August 2008). \"On TV, Timing Is Everything at the Olympics\". The New York Times. ISSN\u00a00362-4331. Retrieved 22 February 2022.^ \"Swimming, gymnastics finals set for mornings in 2008\". ESPN.com. 26 October 2006. Retrieved 22 February 2022.^ a b Buchanon & Mallon 2006, p.\u00a0cii.^ Slack 2004, pp.\u00a0194\u2013195.^ \"Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, The Olympic Effect, March 2009\" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 April 2010. Retrieved 23 November 2019.^ a b c \"The Olympic Symbols\" (PDF). International Olympic Committee. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 March 2009. Retrieved 4 February 2009.^ Lennartz, Karl (2002). \"The Story of the Rings\" (PDF). Journal of Olympic History. 10: 29\u201361. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 January 2016. Retrieved 30 November 2016.^ \"Sport athl\u00e9tique\", 14 mars 1891: \"... dans une \u00e9loquente allocution il a souhait\u00e9 que ce drapeau les conduise 'souvent \u00e0 la victoire, \u00e0 la lutte toujours'. Il a dit qu'il leur donnait pour devise ces trois mots qui sont le fondement et la raison d'\u00eatre des sports athl\u00e9tiques: citius, altius, fortius, 'plus vite, plus haut, plus fort'.\", cited in Hoffmane, Simone La carri\u00e8re du p\u00e8re Didon, Dominicain. 1840\u20131900, Doctoral thesis, Universit\u00e9 de Paris IV \u2013 Sorbonne, 1985, p. 926; cf. Michaela Lochmann, Les fondements p\u00e9dagogiques de la devise olympique \"citius, altius, fortius\"^ \"The Olympic flame and the torch relay\" (PDF). Olympic Museum. International Olympic Committee. 2007. p.\u00a06. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 March 2009. Retrieved 4 February 2009.^ \"IOC Investigation\". Real Sports with Bryant Gumbel. Season 22. Episode 7. 26 July 2016. HBO.^ \"Olympic Summer Games Mascots from Munich 1972 to London 2012\" (PDF). Olympic Studies Centre. April 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 October 2012. Retrieved 13 July 2013.^ a b c \"Fact sheet: Opening Ceremony of the Summer Olympic Games\" (PDF). International Olympic Committee. February 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 April 2011. Retrieved 14 August 2008.^ a b c \"Fact sheet: Opening Ceremony of the Winter Olympic Games\" (PDF). International Olympic Committee. February 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 March 2009. Retrieved 14 August 2008.^ a b \"The development of the Games \u2013 Between festival and tradition\" (PDF). The Modern Olympic Games (PDF). International Olympic Committee. p.\u00a05. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 March 2009. Retrieved 29 August 2008.^ \"Beijing Dazzles: Chinese History, on Parade as Olympics Begin\". Canadian Broadcasting Centre. 8 August 2008. Archived from the original on 6 September 2008. Retrieved 9 September 2008.^ a b c d \"Closing Ceremony Factsheet\" (PDF). The International Olympic Committee. 5 June 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 October 2011. Retrieved 12 August 2012.^ \"Closing Ceremony\" (PDF). International Olympic Committee. 31 January 2002. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 March 2009. Retrieved 27 August 2008.^ \"The Olympic Flags and Emblem\". The Vancouver Organizing Committee for the 2010 Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games. Archived from the original on 26 April 2009. Retrieved 10 February 2009.^ \"The Latest: Rio Games close with samba-fueled Carnival party\". The San Diego Union-Tribune. Associated Press. 21 August 2016. Retrieved 24 June 2018.^ \"The Closing Ceremonies of the Olympic Game\". International Olympic Committee. 1 June 2014. Retrieved 24 June 2018.^ \"Olympic Games \u2013 The Medal Ceremonies\". Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica. Retrieved 9 October 2020.^ \"Symbols and Traditions: Medal ceremony\". USA Today. 12 July 1999. Retrieved 29 August 2008.^ \"Medal ceremony hostess outfits unveiled\". Sina Online. 18 July 2008. Retrieved 29 August 2008.^ Madhani, Aamer; Armour, Nancy (13 February 2018). \"Medalists at 2018 Winter Olympics get precious keepsake. And a medal\". USA Today. Retrieved 22 April 2018.^ \"Mascots come first, then medals for Olympic champions\". USA Today. Associated Press. 12 February 2018. Retrieved 22 April 2018.^ Ogilvie, Claire (18 October 2006). \"Prof says Olympic podiums have Canadian connection\". The Province. Vancouver, British Columbia. p.\u00a025.^ \"Wrestling\". The Beijing Organizing Committee for the Games of the XXIX Olympiad. Archived from the original on 26 February 2009. Retrieved 25 March 2009.^ \"Sports\". International Olympic Committee. Retrieved 8 February 2009.^ \"Olympic Sports of the Past\". olympic.org. Archived from the original on 18 December 2008. Retrieved 10 February 2009.^ Olympic Charter 2007, pp.\u00a088\u201390.^ \"International Sports Federations\". International Olympic Committee. Retrieved 8 February 2009.^ Olympic Charter 2007, p.\u00a087.^ \"Factsheet: The sessions\" (PDF). International Olympic Committee. p.\u00a01. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 April 2011. Retrieved 8 February 2009.^ \"Recognised Sports\". olympic.org. Archived from the original on 24 March 2009. Retrieved 31 March 2009.^ a b c d e f g h \"Factsheet: The sports on the Olympic programme\" (PDF). International Olympic Committee. February 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 March 2009. Retrieved 3 July 2012.^ a b \"Golf, rugby added for 2016 and 2020\". ESPN. Associated Press. 9 October 2009. Retrieved 9 October 2009.^ a b c d Eassom 1994, pp.\u00a0120\u2013123.^ \"Jim Thorpe Biography\". Biography.com. Retrieved 9 February 2009.^ \"Garmisch-Partenkirchen 1936\". International Olympic Committee. Retrieved 25 July 2011.^ \"The Role of Sports in The Soviet Union \u2013 Guided History\". blogs.bu.edu.^ a b \"Soviet Sports and Intelligence Activities\" (PDF). Central Intelligence Agency. 28 December 1954. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 April 2021. Retrieved 25 December 2018.^ Cervin, Georgia (2021). Degrees of Difficulty: How Women's Gymnastics Rose to Prominence and Fell from Grace. University of Illinois Press. ISBN\u00a0978-0-25204377-2.^ \"Symbols and traditions: Amateurism\". USA Today. 12 July 1999. Retrieved 9 February 2009.^ \"Soviet Control of Sports Activities and Sports Propaganda\" (PDF). Central Intelligence Agency. 7 February 1955. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 July 2021. Retrieved 22 August 2021.^ \"Soviet Sports as an Instrument of Political Propaganda\" (PDF). Central Intelligence Agency. 20 January 1955. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 July 2021. Retrieved 22 August 2021.^ Schantz, Otto. \"The Olympic Ideal and the Winter Games Attitudes Towards the Olympic Winter Games in Olympic Discourses \u2013 from Coubertin to Samaranch\" (PDF). Comit\u00e9 International Pierre De Coubertin. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 September 2016. Retrieved 19 September 2016.^ a b c \"Protesting Amateur Rules, Canada Leaves International Hockey\". iihf.com. 4 January 1970. Archived from the original on 20 February 2016.^ \"Finally, Canada to Host the World Championship\". iihf.com. 7 May 2004. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016.^ \"Summit Series '72 Summary\". Hockey Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on 7 August 2008. Retrieved 2 March 2009.^ \"First Canada Cup Opens Up the Hockey World\". iihf.com. 15 September 1976. Archived from the original on 14 March 2016.^ Kr\u00fcger & Murray 2003, p.\u00a0230^ \"Melbourne/Stockholm 1956\". International Olympic Committee. Retrieved 25 July 2011.^ a b \"African nations boycott costly Montreal Games\". CBC Sports. 30 July 2008. Archived from the original on 15 August 2012. Retrieved 6 February 2009.^ \"Africa and the XXIst Olympiad\" (PDF). Olympic Review (109\u2013110): 584\u2013585. November\u2013December 1976. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 February 2008. Retrieved 6 February 2009.^ MacIntosh, Donald; Greenhorn, Donna; Hawes, Michael (1991). \"Trudeau, Taiwan, and the 1976 Montreal Olympics\". American Review of Canadian Studies. 21 (4): 423\u2013448. doi:10.1080/02722019109481098.^ \"Game playing in Montreal\" (PDF). Olympic Review (107\u2013108): 461\u2013462. October 1976. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 February 2009. Retrieved 7 February 2009.^ \"ChinaOlympic History\". Chinaorbit.com. Archived from the original on 31 May 2008. Retrieved 27 August 2008.^ \"Moscow 1980\". International Olympic Committee. Retrieved 25 July 2011.^ \"Moscow 1980:Cold War, Cold Shoulder\". Deutsche Welle. 31 July 2008. Retrieved 27 April 2009.^ \"Los Angeles 1984\". International Olympic Committee. Retrieved 25 July 2011.^ \"Australia: Calls to Boycott Beijing Olympics\". Inter Press Service. Archived from the original on 12 September 2008. Retrieved 10 September 2008.^ \"Diplomats Visit Tibet as EU Split on Olympic Opening Boycott\". The Economic Times. 29 March 2008. Retrieved 7 February 2008.^ \"Putin Faces Green Olympic Challenge: The Sochi 2014 Winter Games are threatened by a looming international boycott, environmental concerns, and public protests against local development\". Christian Science Monitor. 11 July 2008. Archived from the original on 22 August 2009. Retrieved 18 August 2008., The Christian Science Monitor. Retrieved 18 August 2008.^ Bernas, Frederick (5 December 2009). \"Olympic challenge for Sochi Games\". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 31 May 2011.^ Doherty, Erin (3 February 2022). \"What a diplomatic boycott of the Winter Olympics means\". Axios. Retrieved 20 February 2022.^ Simone McCarthy and Rhea Mogul (4 February 2022). \"India launches last-minute diplomatic boycott of Beijing Olympics over Chinese soldier\". CNN. Retrieved 20 February 2022.^ Litsky, Frank (1980), \"Jesse Owens Dies of Cancer at 66\", The New York Times, New York, retrieved 23 March 2014^ Findling & Pelle 2004, p.\u00a0107.^ Findling & Pelle 2004, pp.\u00a0111\u2013112.^ \"Spartakiads\". Sovetskaya Entsiklopediya. Vol.\u00a024.1. 1976. p.\u00a0286.^ Roche 2000, p.\u00a0106.^ \"The USSR and Olympism\" (PDF). Olympic Review (84): 530\u2013557. October 1974. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 April 2008. Retrieved 4 May 2009.^ Benson, Tyler. \"The Role of Sports in The Soviet Union\". blogs.bu.edu. Guided History. Retrieved 25 December 2018.^ \"1968: Black athletes make silent protest\". BBC News. 17 October 1968. Retrieved 7 February 2009.^ \"Iranian Judoka rewarded after snubbing Israeli\". NBC Sports. Associated Press. 8 September 2004. Archived from the original on 25 March 2009. Retrieved 7 February 2009.^ \"IOC EB recommends no participation of Russian and Belarusian athletes and officials\". International Olympic Committee. 3 March 2021. Archived from the original on 1 March 2022. Retrieved 3 March 2022.^ \"Tom Hicks\". Sports-reference.com. Archived from the original on 17 April 2020. Retrieved 30 January 2009.^ a b \"A Brief History of Anti-Doping\". World Anti-Doping Agency. Archived from the original on 16 August 2011. Retrieved 10 September 2008.^ Begley, Sharon (7 January 2008). \"The Drug Charade\". Newsweek. Retrieved 27 August 2008.^ a b Hunt, Thomas M. (2011). Drug Games: The International Olympic Committee and the Politics of Doping. University of Texas Press. p.\u00a066. ISBN\u00a0978-0292739574.^ a b Ruiz, Rebecca R. (13 August 2016). \"The Soviet Doping Plan: Document Reveals Illicit Approach to '84 Olympics\". The New York Times. ISSN\u00a00362-4331. Archived from the original on 15 August 2016. Retrieved 3 September 2016.^ Porterfield 2008, p.\u00a015.^ Montague, James (23 July 2012). \"Hero or villain? Ben Johnson and the dirtiest race in history\". CNN. Retrieved 25 December 2018.^ Coile, Zachary (27 April 2005). \"Bill Seeks to Toughen Drug Testing in Pro Sports\". The San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved 3 September 2008.^ \"Doping: 3667 athletes tested, IOC seeks action against Halkia's coach\". Express India Newspapers. 19 August 2008. Archived from the original on 1 December 2008. Retrieved 28 August 2008.^ \"Play True\" (PDF). World Anti-Doping Agency. 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 January 2013. Retrieved 13 July 2013.^ \"Anti-Doping Results Announced\". The New York Times. The Associated Press. 25 July 2012. Archived from the original on 28 July 2012. Retrieved 13 July 2013.^ \"IOC Orders Belarus to Return Gold\". ESPN. 13 August 2012. Retrieved 13 July 2013.^ \"Electronic Documentary Package of the IP Professor Richard H. McLaren, O.C.\" December 2016. Archived from the original on 28 January 2017. Retrieved 28 December 2018.^ \"McLaren Independent Investigation Report into Sochi Allegations \u2013 Part II\". World Anti-Doping Agency. 9 December 2016. Archived from the original on 9 December 2016. Retrieved 28 December 2018.^ Ruiz, Rebecca R. (9 December 2016). \"Report Shows Vast Reach of Russian Doping: 1,000 Athletes, 30 Sports\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 17 December 2016.^ Ostlere, Lawrence (9 December 2016). \"McLaren report: more than 1,000 Russian athletes involved in doping conspiracy\". The Guardian.^ \"Rio Olympics 2016: Which Russian athletes have been cleared to compete?\". BBC Sport. 6 August 2016. Retrieved 2 February 2020.^ Ruiz, Rebecca R.; Panja, Tariq (5 December 2017). \"Russia Banned From Winter Olympics by I.O.C.\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 17 December 2017. Retrieved 2 February 2020.^ \"Russia banned from Olympics for four years over doping scandal: TASS\". MSN. Reuters. 9 December 2019. Retrieved 9 December 2019.^ \"Russia banned for four years to include 2020 Olympics and 2022 World Cup\". BBC Sport. 9 December 2019. Retrieved 9 December 2019.^ \"Russia Confirms It Will Appeal 4-Year Olympic Ban\". Time. 27 December 2019. Archived from the original on 27 December 2019. {{cite magazine}}: Unknown parameter |agency= ignored (help)^ Dunbar, Graham (17 December 2020). \"Russia can't use its name and flag at the next 2 Olympics\". Associated Press. Retrieved 17 December 2020.^ T\u00e9trault-Farber, Gabrielle; Axon, Iain; Grohmann, Karolos (9 February 2022). \"Figure skating-Russian media say teen star tested positive for banned drug\". Reuters. Retrieved 9 February 2022.^ Brennan, Christine (9 February 2022). \"Positive drug test by Russian Kamila Valieva has forced a delay of Olympic team medals ceremony\". USA Today.^ Thompson, Anna (11 February 2022). \"Winter Olympics: Kamila Valieva failed drug test confirmed\". BBC Sport. Retrieved 12 February 2022.^ Macur, Juliet; Keh, Andrew (12 February 2022). \"Star Russian Figure Skater Tested Positive for Banned Drug\". The New York Times.^ Lonas, Lexi (12 February 2022). \"Russian figure skater's drug test case to be heard Sunday\". The Hill.^ Ritchie, Hannah; Watson, Angus; Regan, Helen (11 February 2022). \"Kamila Valieva: Russian anti-doping agency allowed teenage figure skater to compete in Olympics despite failed drug test\". CNN. Retrieved 12 February 2022.^ PA Media (12 February 2022). \"Kamila Valieva: IOC welcomes investigation of Russian figure skater's entourage as 15-year-old awaits CAS decision at Winter Olympics\". Sky Sports.^ Goodwin, Sam (22 February 2022). \"Spanish skater caught in shock new scandal after Winter Olympics\". Yahoo Sport Australia. Archived from the original on 26 February 2022.^ \"Evan Bates calls Kamila Valiyeva doping case secrecy 'an injustice'\". OlympicTalk. NBC Sports. 23 October 2022. Archived from the original on 16 November 2023.^ Zemlianichenko, Alexander (23 October 2022). \"Russia Grand Prix Figure Skating Valieva\". The Herald Journal. Archived from the original on 25 October 2022.^ \"Kamila Valiyeva could be banned through 2026 Winter Olympics\". NBC Sports. By OlympicTalk. 14 November 2022.^ a b Al-Ahmed, Ali (19 May 2008). \"Bar countries that ban women athletes\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2 May 2013.^ \"Arab women make breakthrough at Games\". CNN/SI. 23 September 2000. Archived from the original on 10 August 2004.^ \"Afghan women's Olympic dream\". BBC News. 22 June 2004. Archived from the original on 19 July 2004.^ Wallechinsky, David (29 July 2008). \"Should Saudi Arabia be Banned from the Olympics?\". The Huffington Post.^ MacKay, Duncan (1 July 2010). \"Qatar decision to send female athletes to London 2012 increases pressure on Saudi Arabia\". Inside the Games. Archived from the original on 28 December 2014. Retrieved 31 May 2017.^ Hubbard, Alan (4 July 2010). \"Inside Lines: Protests at 2012 if Saudis say 'no girls allowed'\". The Independent. Archived from the original on 28 June 2015.^ \"Saudis to send 2 women to London, make history\". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on 15 July 2012. Retrieved 13 July 2012.^ \"London 2012 Olympics: Saudi Arabian women to compete\". BBC News. 12 July 2012. Archived from the original on 17 July 2012.^ \"Female Gulf athletes make their mark in London Olympics\". Agence France-Presse. 13 August 2012. Archived from the original on 28 March 2014.^ \"Women's boxing gains Olympic spot\". BBC Sport. 13 August 2009. Archived from the original on 15 August 2009.^ Mather, Victor (21 February 2018). \"Desperately Seeking Skiers for a Budding Olympic Sport\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 11 March 2018. Retrieved 24 June 2018.^ Goldsmith, Belinda (28 July 2012). \"Men notch up an Olympic win at sex equality Games\". Reuters. Retrieved 25 December 2018.^ \"Bush turns attention from politics to Olympics\". NBC News. Associated Press. 7 August 2008. Retrieved 30 January 2009.^ \"Olympic Shooters Hug as their Countries do Battle\". CNN. 10 August 2008. Retrieved 10 August 2008.^ \"Munich 1972: Massacre at Munich - 50 Years of Olympic Broadcasting\". CBC.ca. Archived from the original on 23 February 2008. Retrieved 29 August 2008.^ Senor, Juan I. (1 April 1992). \"Spain Tackles Terrorist Threat by Basques to Olympics, Expo\". Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on 26 March 2023.^ Finkelstein, Beth; Koch, Noel (11 August 1991). \"The Threat to the Games in Spain\". Washington Post. Archived from the original on 14 November 2020.^ \"Olympic Park Bombing\". CNN. Archived from the original on 28 August 2008. Retrieved 29 August 2008.^ \"IOC on bin Laden killing: no bearing on Olympic security\". Daily Hampshire Gazette. Associated Press. 3 May 2011. Archived from the original on 27 September 2011. Retrieved 25 July 2011.^ \"Olympic Charter\" (PDF). Lausanne, Switzerland: International Olympic Committee. July 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 October 2009. Retrieved 27 July 2012.^ Shachar 2011, pp.\u00a02114\u20132116.^ \"IOC suspends Russian Olympic Committee for incorporating Ukrainian sports regions\". 12 October 2023.^ https://olympics.com/ioc/news/ioc-executive-board-approves-nine-changes-of-nationality^ https://olympics.com/ioc/news/ioc-executive-board-approves-seven-athletes-changes-of-sporting-nationality-for-the-olympic-games-paris-2024^ \"\"\u0421\u0432\u0430\u0432\u0456\u043b\u043b\u044f \u0442\u0430 \u0431\u0435\u0437\u0437\u0430\u043a\u043e\u043d\u043d\u044f!\" \u0420\u043e\u0441\u0456\u044f \u0432\u043b\u0430\u0448\u0442\u0443\u0432\u0430\u043b\u0430 \u0456\u0441\u0442\u0435\u0440\u0438\u043a\u0443 \u0447\u0435\u0440\u0435\u0437 \u0432\u0442\u0435\u0447\u0443 \u0441\u043f\u043e\u0440\u0442\u0441\u043c\u0435\u043d\u0456\u0432 \u0437 \u0420\u0424, \u044f\u043a\u0438\u0445 \u043f\u0456\u0434\u0442\u0440\u0438\u043c\u0430\u0432 \u041c\u041e\u041a\". 30 November 2023.^ \"Moscow calls on IOC to provide official explanations on transfer of three Russian athletes\".^ Larmer, Brook (19 August 2008). \"The Year of the Mercenary Athlete\". Time. Archived from the original on 19 August 2008. Retrieved 27 November 2011.^ \"Medals of Beijing Olympic Games Unveiled\". The International Olympic Committee. Archived from the original on 3 September 2008. Retrieved 3 September 2008.^ \"St Louis 1904\". Olympic Games. Retrieved 3 July 2012.^ \"The Modern Olympic Games\" (PDF). The Olympic Museum. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 September 2008. Retrieved 29 August 2008.^ Munro, James (25 August 2008). \"Britain may aim for third in 2012\". BBC Sport. Retrieved 25 August 2008.^ Charles J.P. Lucas (1905). The Olympic Games \u2013 1904 (PDF). St. Louis, MO: Woodard & Tiernan. p.\u00a047. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2009. Retrieved 28 February 2008.^ \"Olympic Medal Winners\". International Olympic Committee. Retrieved 2 February 2014.^ MacCarthy, Kevin (30 March 2010). \"St Louis \u2013 Ireland's Olympic Awakening\". Gold, Silver and Green: The Irish Olympic Journey 1896\u20131924. Cork University Press. pp.\u00a0117\u2013146. ISBN\u00a09781859184585.^ The Equestrian Games of the XVI Olympiad Stockholm 1956 (PDF). Stockholm: Esselte Aktiebolag. 1959. p.\u00a023. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 April 2008. Retrieved 4 February 2008.^ XVI Olympiad Melbourne 1956 (PDF). Melbourne: W. M. Houston. 1958. p.\u00a037. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 January 2014. Retrieved 23 April 2015.^ a b c d \"Olympic Charter\" (PDF). International Olympic Committee. pp.\u00a072\u201375. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 July 2011. Retrieved 2 April 2009.^ \"Future Olympic Games elections to be more flexible\". International Olympic Committee (Press release). 2 May 2019.^ a b \"Choice of the Host City\". olympic.org. 2009. Archived from the original on 2 April 2009. Retrieved 2 April 2009.SourcesBuchanon, Ian; Mallon, Bill (2006). Historical Dictionary of the Olympic Movement. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press. ISBN\u00a0978-0-8108-5574-8.Burkert, Walter (1983). \"Pelops at Olympia\". Homo Necans. University of California Press. ISBN\u00a0978-0-520-05875-0.Cooper-Chen, Anne (2005). Global entertainment media. Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. ISBN\u00a0978-0-8058-5168-7. Retrieved 21 March 2009.Coubertin, Pierre de; Philemon, Timoleon J.; Politis, N.G.; Anninos, Charalambos (1897). The Olympic Games: BC 776 \u2013 AD 1896. The Olympic Games in 1896 \u2013 Second Part (PDF). Athens: Charles Beck. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 August 2007. Retrieved 2 February 2009.Crowther, Nigel B. (2007). \"The Ancient Olympic Games\". Sport in Ancient Times. Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN\u00a0978-0-275-98739-8.Eassom, Simon (1994). Critical Reflections on Olympic Ideology. Ontario: The Centre for Olympic Studies. ISBN\u00a0978-0-7714-1697-2.Findling, John E.; Pelle, Kimberly D. (2004). Encyclopedia of the Modern Olympic Movement. Westport CT: Greenwood Press. ISBN\u00a0978-0-313-32278-5. Retrieved 30 March 2009.Gershon, Richard A. (2000). Telecommunications Management:Industry structures and planning strategies. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. ISBN\u00a0978-0-8058-3002-6. Retrieved 21 March 2009.Girginov, Vassil; Parry, Jim (2005). The Olympic Games Explained: A Student Guide to the Evolution of the Modern Olympic Games. Routledge. ISBN\u00a0978-0-415-34604-7. Retrieved 3 July 2012.Golden, Mark (2009). \"Helpers, Horses, and Heroes\". Greek Sport and Social Status. University of Texas Press. ISBN\u00a0978-0-292-71869-2.\"All Games since 1896\". International Olympic Committee. Retrieved 20 February 2013.Kr\u00fcger, Arnd; Murray, William J. (2003). The Nazi Olympics: sport, politics and appeasement in the 1930s. University of Illinois Press. ISBN\u00a0978-0-252-02815-1. Retrieved 3 July 2012.Maraniss, David (2008). Rome 1960. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN\u00a0978-1-4165-3407-5.Matthews, George R. (2005). America's first Olympics: the St. Louis games of 1904. University of Missouri Press. p.\u00a053. ISBN\u00a0978-0-8262-1588-8. liverpool.\"Olympic Charter\" (PDF). International Olympic Committee. 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 July 2011. Retrieved 19 September 2012.Porterfield, Jason (2008). Doping:Athletes and Drugs. New York: Rosen Publishing Group. p.\u00a015. ISBN\u00a0978-1-4042-1917-5.Richardson, N.J. (1992). \"Panhellenic Cults and Panhellenic Poets\". In Lewis, D.M.; Boardman, John; Davies, J.K. (eds.). The Fifth Century BC. Cambridge University Press. ISBN\u00a0978-0-521-23347-7. Retrieved 2 February 2013.Roche, Maurice (2000). Mega-Events and Modernity. New York: Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group. ISBN\u00a0978-0-415-15711-7. Retrieved 30 January 2009.Shachar, Ayelet (2011). \"Picking Winners: Olympic Citizenship and the Global Race for Talent\". Yale Law Journal. 120 (8): 2088\u20132139.Slack, Trevor (2004). The Commercialisation of sport. New York: Routledge. ISBN\u00a0978-0-7146-8078-1. Retrieved 31 March 2009.Swaddling, Judith (1999). The Ancient Olympic Games. University of Texas Press. ISBN\u00a0978-0-292-77751-4.Swaddling, Judith (2000). The Ancient Olympic Games (2\u00a0ed.). Austin: University of Texas Press. ISBN\u00a0978-0-292-70373-5. OCLC\u00a010759486. Retrieved 6 June 2009.Tomlinson, Alan (2005). Sport and leisure cultures. Minneapolis MN: University of Minnesota Press. ISBN\u00a0978-0-8166-3382-1. Retrieved 2 April 2009.\"Vancouver 2010 Mascots Introduced to the World\". Canada Newswire. Vancouver Organizing Committee for the 2010 Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games. 27 November 2007. Archived from the original on 13 April 2014. Retrieved 10 March 2014.Weiler, Ingomar (2004). \"The predecessors of the Olympic movement, and Pierre de Coubertin\". European Review. 12 (3): 427\u2013443. doi:10.1017/S1062798704000365. S2CID\u00a0145511333.Woods, Ron (2007). Social Issues in Sport. Champaign IL: Human Kinetics. p.\u00a0146. ISBN\u00a0978-0-7360-5872-8. Retrieved 2 April 2009. television ratings decline olympic games torino.Young, David C. (2004). \"The Beginnings\". A Brief History of the Olympic Games. Wiley-Blackwell. ISBN\u00a0978-1-4051-1130-0.Young, David C. (1996). The Modern Olympics: A Struggle for Revival. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN\u00a0978-0-8018-7207-5.Further readingBoykoff, Jules (2016). Power Games: A Political History of the Olympics. New York and London: Verso. ISBN\u00a0978-1-784-78072-2.Buchanan, Ian (2001). Historical dictionary of the Olympic movement. Lanham: Scarecrow Presz. ISBN\u00a0978-0-8108-4054-6.Kamper, Erich; Mallon, Bill (1992). The Golden Book of the Olympic Games. Milan: Vallardi & Associati. ISBN\u00a0978-88-85202-35-1.Preuss, Holger; Marcia Semitiel Garc\u00eda (2005). The Economics of Staging the Olympics: A Comparison of the Games 1972\u20132008. Edward Elgar Publishing. ISBN\u00a0978-1-84376-893-7.Sarantakes, Nicholas Evan. \"The Olympics and the Cold War: A Historiography\" Journal of Cold War Studies (Dec 2023), Vol.25, 127\u2013158. doi: 10.1162/jcws_a_01173Simson, Vyv; Jennings, Andrew (1992). Dishonored Games: Corruption, Money, and Greed at the Olympics. New York: S.P.I. Books. ISBN\u00a0978-1-56171-199-4.Stromberg, Joseph (24 July 2012). \"When the Olympics Gave Out Medals for Art (painters, sculptors, writers, musicians)\". Smithsonian Magazine. Retrieved 4 October 2021.Wallechinsky, David (2004). The Complete Book of the Summer Olympics, Athens 2004 Edition. SportClassic Books. ISBN\u00a0978-1-894963-32-9.Wallechinsky, David (2005). The Complete Book of the Winter Olympics, Turin 2006 Edition. SportClassic Books. ISBN\u00a0978-1-894963-45-9.External linksOlympic Games  at Wikipedia's sister projectsDefinitions from WiktionaryMedia from CommonsNews from WikinewsQuotations from WikiquoteTexts from WikisourceTextbooks from WikibooksResources from WikiversityTravel information from WikivoyageOfficial website \"Olympic Games\". Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica Online.Olympic Games at CurlieNew York Times Interactive of all the medals in the Modern Olympicsinsidethegames \u2013 the latest and most up to date news and interviews from the world of Olympic, Commonwealth and Paralympic GamesATR \u2013 Around the Rings \u2013 the Business Surrounding the OlympicsGamesBids.com \u2013 An Authoritative Review of Olympic Bid Business (home of the BidIndex\u2122)Database OlympicsHistory of Olympics to the Present DayReference book about all Olympic Medalists of all timesvteOlympic GamesOlympic sportsOlympismIOCCharterOlympic CongressIOC meetingsInternational sports federationsMedalsMedal tableAll-time medal tableyouthMedal table leaders by Olympic GamesMedalistsyouthMedal tiesIncentives by countryStripped medalsOlympic diplomaOlive wreathNationsSummer OlympicsWinter Olympicstropical nationscountry codesHost citiesBidsyouthVenuesyouthOlympic StadiumCeremoniesPeople who opened the OlympicsTorch relayslighters of the Olympic cauldronKeepers of the Olympic flagMediaTelevisionOlympic Broadcasting ServicesOlympic ChannelSocial mediaVideo gamesSymbolsFlameOlympiadOathSongs and anthemsHymnEmblemPosterMascotsCoinssummerwinterPierre de Coubertin medalOlympic CupOlympic Diploma of MeritOlympic LaurelOlympic OrderOtherArt competitions at the OlympicsmedalistsScandals and controversiesantisemitismcolonialismdopingDeathsWWIWWIIParticipation of womenRelatedParalympic GamesContinentalAfricanAsianEuropeanPacificPan-AmericanOlympic Esports SeriesDeaflympicsSpecial Olympics1906\u00a0Intercalated\u00a0GamesAncient Olympic GamesOlympic GamesSummer1896 Athens1900 Paris1904 St. Louis1908 London1912 Stockholm1916[a]1920 Antwerp1924 Paris1928 Amsterdam1932 Los Angeles1936 Berlin1940[b]1944[b]1948 London1952 Helsinki1956 Melbourne1960 Rome1964 Tokyo1968 Mexico City1972 Munich1976 Montreal1980 Moscow1984 Los Angeles1988 Seoul1992 Barcelona1996 Atlanta2000 Sydney2004 Athens2008 Beijing2012 London2016 Rio de Janeiro2020 Tokyo[c]2024 Paris2028 Los Angeles2032 Brisbane2036Winter1924 Chamonix1928 St. Moritz1932 Lake Placid1936 Garmisch-Partenkirchen1940[b]1944[b]1948 St. Moritz1952 Oslo1956 Cortina d'Ampezzo1960 Squaw Valley1964 Innsbruck1968 Grenoble1972 Sapporo1976 Innsbruck1980 Lake Placid1984 Sarajevo1988 Calgary1992 Albertville1994 Lillehammer1998 Nagano2002 Salt Lake City2006 Turin2010 Vancouver2014 Sochi2018 Pyeongchang2022 Beijing2026 Milan Cortina2030Youth Olympic GamesSummer2010 Singapore2014 Nanjing2018 Buenos Aires2026 Dakar[d]2030Winter2012 Innsbruck2016 Lillehammer2020 Lausanne2024 Gangwon2028^ Cancelled due to World War I^ a b c d Cancelled due to World War II^ Postponed to 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic^ Postponed to 2026 due to the COVID-19 pandemic\u00a0Portal Category CommonsvteNational Olympic Committees that have competed at the Olympic GamesNations at the Summer OlympicsNations at the Winter Olympicstropical nationsAfricaAlgeriaAngolaBeninBotswanaBurkina FasoBurundiCameroonCape VerdeCentral African RepublicChadComorosCongoDR CongoDjiboutiEgyptEquatorial GuineaEritreaEswatiniEthiopiaGabonThe GambiaGhanaGuineaGuinea-BissauIvory CoastKenyaLesothoLiberiaLibyaMadagascarMalawiMaliMauritaniaMauritiusMoroccoMozambiqueNamibiaNigerNigeriaRwandaS\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 and Pr\u00edncipeSenegalSeychellesSierra LeoneSomaliaSouth AfricaSouth SudanSudanTanzaniaTogoTunisiaUgandaZambiaZimbabweAmericasAntigua and BarbudaArgentinaArubaBahamasBarbadosBelizeBermudaBoliviaBrazilBritish Virgin IslandsCanadaSummerWinterCayman IslandsChileColombiaCosta RicaCubaDominicaDominican RepublicEcuadorEl SalvadorGrenadaGuatemalaGuyanaHaitiHondurasJamaicaMexicoNicaraguaPanamaParaguayPeruPuerto RicoSt. Kitts and NevisSt. LuciaSt. Vincent and the GrenadinesSurinameTrinidad and TobagoUnited StatesSummerWinterUruguayVenezuelaVirgin IslandsAsiaAfghanistanBahrainBangladeshBhutanBruneiCambodiaChinaChinese TaipeiEast TimorHong KongIndiaIndonesiaIranIraqJapanJordanKazakhstanKoreaNorthSouthUnifiedKuwaitKyrgyzstanLaosLebanonMalaysiaMaldivesMongoliaMyanmarNepalOmanPakistanPalestinePhilippinesQatarSaudi ArabiaSingaporeSri LankaSyriaTajikistanThailandTurkmenistanUnited Arab EmiratesUzbekistanVietnamYemenEuropeAlbaniaAndorraArmeniaAustriaAzerbaijanBelarusBelgiumBosnia and HerzegovinaBulgariaCroatiaCyprusCzech RepublicDenmarkEstoniaFinlandFranceGeorgiaGermanySummerWinterGreat BritainGreeceHungaryIcelandIrelandIsraelItalyKosovoLatviaLiechtensteinLithuaniaLuxembourgMaltaMoldovaMonacoMontenegroNetherlandsNorth MacedoniaNorwayPolandPortugalRomaniaRussiaSan MarinoSerbiaSlovakiaSloveniaSpainSwedenSwitzerlandTurkeyUkraineOceaniaAmerican SamoaAustraliaWinterCook IslandsFijiGuamKiribatiMarshall IslandsMicronesiaNauruNew ZealandPalauPapua New GuineaSamoaSolomon IslandsTongaTuvaluVanuatuOtherIndependent OlympiansRefugee Olympic TeamHistoricalAustralasiaBohemiaBritish West IndiesRepublic of ChinaCzechoslovakiaGermanyEastWestUnitedMixed teamsNetherlands AntillesNorth BorneoRhodesiaRussiaRussian EmpireSoviet UnionUnified TeamOlympic Athletes from RussiaRussian Olympic CommitteeSaarSerbia and MontenegroYemenNorthSouthYugoslavia\u00a0Olympic Games portalvteSports at the Olympic GamesSummer sportsAquaticsArtistic swimmingDivingSwimmingWater poloArcheryAthleticsBadmintonBasketball3x3 basketballBoxingCanoeingCyclingEquestrianFencingField hockeyFootballGolfGymnasticsArtistic gymnasticsHandballJudoModern pentathlonRowingRugby sevensSailingShootingSkateboardingSport climbingSurfingTable tennisTaekwondoTennisTriathlonVolleyballBeach volleyballWeightliftingWrestlingWinter sportsBiathlonBobsleighBobsleighSkeletonCurlingIce hockeyLugeSkatingFigure skatingShort track speed skatingSpeed skatingSkiingAlpine skiingCross-country skiingFreestyle skiingNordic combinedSki jumpingSnowboarding2024 additionBreaking2026 additionSki mountaineering2028 additionsBaseball / SoftballCricketFlag footballLacrosseSquashPast sportsBasque pelotaCroquetJeu de paumeKarateMilitary patrolPoloRacketsRoqueRugby union (15-a-side)Tug of warWater motorsportsDemonstration sportsAmerican footballAustralian footballBandyBudoGlidingIce stock sportKorfballLa cannePes\u00e4palloRoller hockeySavateSkijoringSled dog racingSwedish gymnasticsSpeed skiingWater skiingWinter pentathlonUnofficial sportsAeronauticsAlpinismAnglingArt competitionsBallooningBoulesBowlingCannon shootingChessCycle poloDisabled skiingFire fightingGaelic footballGlimaGotland sportsHurlingIndian sportsKaatsenKite flyingLife savingLongue paumeMilitary exerciseMotor racingMotorcycle racingPigeon racingPistol duelingWheelchair racingWushuParalympic sports\u00a0Olympic Games portalvteOlympic Games resultsSummer sportsArchery19001904190819201972197619801984198819921996200020042008201220162020Athletics18961900190419081912192019241928193219361948195219561960196419681972197619801984198819921996200020042008201220162020Badminton19921996200020042008201220162020Baseball199219962000200420082020Basketball19361948195219561960196419681972197619801984198819921996200020042008201220162020Basque pelota1900Beach volleyball19962000200420082012Boxing19041908192019241928193219361948195219561960196419681972197619801984198819921996200020042008201220162020Canoeing19361948195219561960196419681972197619801984198819921996200020042008201220162020Cricket1900Croquet1900Cycling18961900190419081912192019241928193219361948195219561960196419681972197619801984198819921996200020042008201220162020Diving190419081912192019241928193219361948195219561960196419681972197619801984198819921996200020042008201220162020Equestrian19001912192019241928193219361948195219561960196419681972197619801984198819921996200020042008201220162020Fencing18961900190419081912192019241928193219361948195219561960196419681972197619801984198819921996200020042008201220162020Field hockey190819201928193219361948195219561960196419681972197619801984198819921996200020042008201220162020Football190019041908191219201924192819361948195219561960196419681972197619801984198819921996200020042008201220162020Golf1900190420162020Gymnastics18961900190419081912192019241928193219361948195219561960196419681972197619801984198819921996200020042008201220162020Handball19361972197619801984198819921996200020042008201220162020Jeu de paume1908Judo19641972197619801984198819921996200020042008201220162020Lacrosse19041908Modern pentathlon1912192019241928193219361948195219561960196419681972197619801984198819921996200020042008201220162020Polo19001908192019241936Rackets1908Roque1904Rowing1900190419081912192019241928193219361948195219561960196419681972197619801984198819921996200020042008201220162020Rugby union1900190819201924Rugby sevens20162020Sailing189619001908191219201924193219361948195219561960196419681972197619801984198819921996200020042008201220162020Shooting189619001908191219201924193219361948195219561960196419681972197619801984198819921996200020042008201220162020Softball19962000200420082020Swimming18961900190419081912192019241928193219361948195219561960196419681972197619801984198819921996200020042008201220162020Synchronized swimming1984198819921996200020042008201220162020Table tennis198819921996200020042008201220162020Taekwondo200020042008201220162020Tennis1896190019041908191219201924198819921996200020042008201220162020Triathlon200020042008201220162020Tug of war19001904190819121920Volleyball196419681972197619801984198819921996200020042008201220162020Water motorsports19001908Water polo1900190419081912192019241928193219361948195219561960196419681972197619801984198819921996200020042008201220162020Weightlifting18961904192019241928193219361948195219561960196419681972197619801984198819921996200020042008201220162020Wrestling1896190419081912192019241928193219361948195219561960196419681972197619801984198819921996200020042008201220162020Winter sportsAlpine skiing193619481952195619601964196819721976198019841988199219941998200220062010201420182022Biathlon192419601964196819721976198019841988199219941998200220062010201420182022Bobsleigh19241928193219361948195219561964196819721976198019841988199219941998200220062010201420182022Cross-country skiing192419281932193619481952195619601964196819721976198019841988199219941998200220062010201420182022Curling19241998200220062010201420182022Figure skating19081920192419281932193619481952195619601964196819721976198019841988199219941998200220062010201420182022Freestyle skiing199219941998200220062010201420182022Ice hockey1920192419281932193619481952195619601964196819721976198019841988199219941998200220062010201420182022Luge1964196819721976198019841988199219941998200220062010201420182022Nordic combined192419281932193619481952195619601964196819721976198019841988199219941998200220062010201420182022Short track speed skating199219941998200220062010201420182022Skeleton19281948200220062010201420182022Ski jumping192419281932193619481952195619601964196819721976198019841988199219941998200220062010201420182022Snowboarding1998200220062010201420182022Speed skating192419281932193619481952195619601964196819721976198019841988199219941998200220062010201420182022\u00a0Olympic Games portalvteOlympic venuesOlympic ParkOlympic StadiumOlympic VillageSummer GamesAlphabetical1\u20139 \u2013 ABCD\u2013EF\u2013GH\u2013IJ\u2013KLM\u2013NOPQ\u2013RST\u2013VW\u2013ZSportArcheryAthleticsBadmintonBaseballBasketballBeach volleyballBoxingCanoeingCyclingDivingEquestrianFencingField hockeyFootballGolfGymnasticsHandballJudoModern pentathlonRowingRugby sevensRugby unionSailingShootingSwimmingSynchronized swimmingTable tennisTaekwondoTennisTriathlonVolleyballWater poloWeightliftingWrestlingDemonstration eventsDiscontinued eventsYears18961900190419081912192019241928193219361948195219561960196419681972197619801984198819921996200020042008201220162020202420282032Winter GamesAlphabetical1\u20139 \u2013 BC\u2013GH\u2013KLMN\u2013RST\u2013ZSportAlpine skiingBiathlonBobsleighCross-country skiingCurlingFigure skatingFreestyle skiingIce hockeyLugeNordic combinedShort track speed skatingSkeletonSki jumpingSnowboardingSpeed skatingDemonstration eventsYears1924192819321936194819521956196019641968197219761980198419881992199419982002200620102014201820222026Venues of the Youth Olympic Games\u00a0Olympic Games Portal Category CommonsvteSummer Olympic Games host cities1896:  Athens1900:  Paris1904:  St. Louis1908:  London1912:  Stockholm1916: None[c1]1920:  Antwerp1924:  Paris1928:  Amsterdam1932:  Los Angeles1936:  Berlin1940: None[c2]1944: None[c2]1948:  London1952:  Helsinki1956:  Melbourne1960:  Rome1964:  Tokyo1968:  Mexico City1972:  Munich1976:  Montreal1980:  Moscow1984:  Los Angeles1988:  Seoul1992:  Barcelona1996:  Atlanta2000:  Sydney2004:  Athens2008:  Beijing2012:  London2016:  Rio de Janeiro2020:  Tokyo[c3]2024:  Paris2028:  Los Angeles2032:  Brisbane[c1] Cancelled due to World War I; [c2] Cancelled due to World War II; [c3] Postponed to 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemicvteWinter Olympic Games host cities1924:  Chamonix1928:  St. Moritz1932:  Lake Placid1936:  Garmisch-Partenkirchen1940: None[c1]1944: None[c1]1948:  St. Moritz1952:  Oslo1956:  Cortina d'Ampezzo1960:  Squaw Valley1964:  Innsbruck1968:  Grenoble1972:  Sapporo1976:  Innsbruck1980:  Lake Placid1984:  Sarajevo1988:  Calgary1992:  Albertville1994:  Lillehammer1998:  Nagano2002:  Salt Lake City2006:  Turin2010:  Vancouver2014:  Sochi2018:  Pyeongchang2022:  Beijing2026:  Milan and Cortina d'Ampezzo[c1] Cancelled due to World War II\u00a0Olympic Games portalvteMulti-sport eventsGlobalOlympicsOlympic GamesSummerWinterYouth Olympic GamesParasportsParalympic GamesSummerWinterDeaflympicsSummerWinterD\u00e9fi sportifIBSA World GamesINAS Global GamesInvictus GamesWorld Dwarf GamesSpecial OlympicsSummerWinterWorld Abilitysport GamesProfessionsFIS Games2021 World Para Snow Sports ChampionshipsUCI Cycling World ChampionshipsInternational Army GamesLumberjack World ChampionshipWorld Air GamesMilitary World GamesWorld Police and Fire GamesWorld Firefighters GamesYouth and studentsFISU World University Games (Universiade)World School Sport Games (Gymnasiade)International Youth Green GamesInternational Children's GamesSELL Student GamesWorld Interuniversity GamesWorld School Sport GamesCommonwealth Youth GamesCPLP GamesUniversity International Sports FestivalOther typesArafura GamesCSIT World Sports GamesDew TourMind Sports OlympiadWorld Mind Sports GamesWorld Mind GamesWorld Beach GamesWorld Combat GamesWorld GamesWorld Masters GamesWorld Nomad GamesWorld Skate GamesWorld Urban GamesX GamesIntercommunityArab GamesBRICS GamesCommonwealth GamesCroatian World GamesGay GamesHighland gamesIslamic Solidarity GamesJeux de la FrancophonieLusofonia GamesMaccabiah GamesPan-Armenian GamesWorld Transplant GamesWorld Eskimo Indian OlympicsWorld Indigenous GamesWorld OutgamesWorld Polonia GamesRegionalAfricaAfrican GamesAfrican Para GamesAfrican Youth GamesAll-Africa University GamesWest African University GamesAmericasPan AmericanPan American GamesParapan American GamesJunior Pan American GamesAmericas Masters GamesCentral American and the CaribbeanCentral American and Caribbean GamesCentral American GamesLatin AmericanALBA GamesBolivarian GamesNorth AmericanCANUSA GamesNorth American Indigenous GamesNorth American OutgamesSouth AmericanSouth American GamesSouth American Beach GamesSouth American Para GamesSouth American University GamesSouth American Youth GamesCaribbeanCaribbean GamesAsiaPan AsianAsian GamesSummerWinterAsian Para GamesAsian Beach GamesAsian Indoor and Martial Arts GamesAsian Youth GamesSoutheast AsianSEA GamesASEAN School GamesASEAN University GamesASEAN Para GamesCentral Asian GamesEast Asian Youth GamesSouth Asian GamesWest Asian Games1EuropeBlack Sea Games1European GamesEuropean Masters GamesEuropean ChampionshipsEuropean Para ChampionshipsEuropean Para Youth GamesEuropean Youth Olympic FestivalEuroGamesEuropean Universities ChampionshipsEuropean Universities GamesGames of the Small States of EuropeInternational Erasmus GamesOceaniaAustralian Youth Olympic FestivalMicronesian GamesPacific GamesPacific Mini GamesArafura GamesPan Pacific Masters GamesIntercontinentalArab GamesArctic Winter GamesAsia Pacific Deaf GamesAsia Pacific Masters GamesIslesIndian Ocean Island GamesIsland GamesJeux des \u00eelesMediterranean GamesNationalAfricaSouth African Games1AmericasCanadaBritish ColumbiaOntarioQuebecSaskatchewanWesternColombiaUnited Statesamateur juniorsseniorsWarrior GamesNCSG,United States3AlabamaCaliforniaFloridaMassachusettsMissouriMontanaNebraskaNew YorkNorth CarolinaNorth Dakota1Lakota NationTexasWisconsinAsiaBangladeshChinaAll-China GamesNational GamesNational Peasants' GamesNational Youth GamesNational Ethnic GamesIndiaYouthUniversityIndonesiaJapanMalaysiaMongoliaPakistanPhilippinesNational GamesStudentYouthSingaporeSouth KoreaSummerWinterThailandYouthVietnamTaiwanNationalAmateurYouthUniversityEuropeNetherlands1Poland (youth)Spartakiad of Albania1Spartakiad of the Peoples of the USSR1youth1WheelPowerHistorical1Pre-Modern Olympics(in order, from 1900 BC to 1859 AD)Tailteann Games (ancient)Panhellenic GamesAncient Olympic GamesPythian GamesNemean GamesIsthmian GamesHeraean GamesPanathenaic GamesRoman GamesCotswold Olimpick GamesGog Magog GamesWenlock Olympian Society Annual GamesZappas OlympicsAlternatives to theModern OlympicsAryan GamesFriendship GamesGANEFOGoodwill GamesInter-Allied GamesIslamic GamesLiberty Bell ClassicPeople's OlympiadWorkers' OlympiadsSpartakiadDefunct regional orcommunity eventsAfro-Asian GamesAsian Indoor GamesAsian Martial Arts GamesBaltic Sea GamesBlack Sea GamesCentral African GamesEast Asian GamesFar Eastern Championship GamesFESPIC GamesGames of the New Emerging ForcesPacific Ocean GamesSpartakiad of the Peoples of the USSRTailteann Games (modern)West African GamesWomen's Islamic GamesWorld Youth GamesIWAS World GamesCerebral Palsy GamesWinter gamesInternationalOlympicsParalympicsWinter University GamesFIS GamesNordic Games1Commonwealth1World ScoutArctic Winter GamesKennedy Memorial1New Zealand Winter GamesWinter World Masters GamesRegionalNational Winter Games of ChinaAsian Winter GamesEuropean Youth Olympic FestivalWinter X Games EuropeRussian\u2013Chinese Winter Youth Games1 Defunct2 Sub-national3 51 component games in 36 U.S. states Category List WikiProjectvteTeam sportsSportGoverning bodiesNational sportSportspeopleInvasion gamesBasket sportsBasketballbeachdeaf3x3waterwheelchairCestoballDueballKorfballNetballFast5indoorwheelchairRezballRingballSlamballFootballcodesAssociation footballamputeebeach soccerfreestylefutsalIndoor soccerminifootballparalympicpowerchairroller soccersoccastreetteqball\u200eAustralian rules footballAFLXLightning footballMetro footyNine-a-sideRec footyGaelic footballLadies'Circle rules footballGridiron codesAmerican footballeight-manflagnine-mansix-mansprinttouchwheelchairArena footballCanadian footballHybrid codesAustusEton wall gameInternational rules footballSamoa rulesSpeedballSwedish footballUniversal footballVolataMedieval/historicalfootball codesBa gameCaidCalcio fiorentinoCampingCnapanCornish hurlingCujuHarpastumKemariLa souleLelo burtiMarn grookPasuckuakohowogRoyal ShrovetideUppies and downiesRugby codesRugby leaguemastersmodninessevenstagwheelchairRugby unionAmerican flagbeachminisevenssnowtagTambotouchtensXTouchWheelchairOther related codesCujuK\u012b-o-rahiJegichagiYubi lakpiStick-and-ballsportsBandoCammagGateballHurlingCamogieSuper11sShinty\u2013HurlingIndigenous North American stickballIomainKnattleikrKnottyLacrossebox/indoorfieldintercrossewomen'sRitinisShintyShinty\u2013HurlingHockey sportsBall hockeyBandyrinkBroomballField hockeyindoorFloor hockeyFloorballIce hockeypondpowerice sledgeRingetteRinkballRoller hockeyin-linequadRossall hockeyShinnyStreet hockeyUnderwater hockeyUnicycle hockeyPolo sportsAuto poloCowboy poloCycle poloElephant poloHobby horse poloHorseballMotoballPatoPoloArena poloChovganSnow poloPolocrosseSegway poloYak poloOther ball sportsAngleballCycle ballDodgeballFlickerballGain-groundBalle \u00e0 la mainBallon au poingJeu de paumeLongue paumeGoalballHandballbeachCzechfieldwheelchairKaatsenKin-BallLagoriMesoamerican ballgamePelota mixtecaPrisonballPushballQuidditchRoll ballTamburelloTchoukballUlamaValencian pilotaLlarguesWhirlyballYukigassenBat-and-ballgamesBaseballBaseball5Br\u00e4nnbollCorkballCricketOne DayTestTwenty20Danish longballIndoor cricketKickballLaptaMatballOin\u0103Over-the-linePes\u00e4palloRoundersSchlagballSoftballFastpitch16-inchStickballStoolballTown ballVigoroVitillaBritish baseballEnglish baseballWelsh baseballWiffle ballWireballNet and wall gamesBall badmintonBiribolBossaballFistballFivesEtonRugbyFootbag netFootball tennisFootvolleyJianziJokguNewcomb ballPetecaSepak takrawThrowballVolleyballbeachindoorparalympicpioneerballsnowTag sportsKabaddiKho khoWorld Chase TagWater sportsSynchronized swimmingUnderwater footballUnderwater rugbyWater polocanoeinner tubeOther non-ball sportsAirsoftBo-taoshiBuzkashiCombat (juggling)CurlingwheelchairGutsHornussenJereedMakura-NagePaintballRoller derbySynchronized skatingTug of warUltimateAuthority control databases InternationalVIAFNationalNorwaySpainFranceBnF dataCataloniaGermanyIsraelUnited StatesSwedenLatviaCzech RepublicOtherHistorical Dictionary of SwitzerlandNARAIdRefRetrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Olympic_Games&oldid=1221912047\""},{"link": "https://en.wikipedia.org//wiki/Paralympic_Games", "content": "Major international sport event for people with disabilitiesFurther information: IWAS World GamesParalympic GamesMain topicsBidsCharterHost citiesIPCNPCsMedal tablesMedalistsSportsSymbolsGamesSummer ParalympicsWinter ParalympicsRegional gamesAsian Para GamesAfrican Para GamesEuropean Para ChampionshipsParapan American GamesvteDisabilityTheory and modelsDisability theoryAbleism\u00a0/ DisablismMedical modelSocial modelEducationMainstreamingIndividualized Education Program (IEP)Special needsSpecial schoolSpecial educationLearning disabilityTherapyPhysicalOccupationalSpeechSocietal implicationsDisability rights movementInclusionNormalizationPeople-first languagePejorative termsSexuality and disabilityWomen's healthPersonal assistanceUnlicensed assistive personnel\u00a0(ADLs)Accessible toiletAssistive technologyAssisted livingMobility aidOrthotics and bracesPhysical accessibilityProstheticsUniversal designWeb accessibilitySocioeconomic assistanceSocial Security Disability InsuranceSupplemental Security IncomeTicket to WorkDisability Living AllowanceDisabled students allowanceDisabled Persons RailcardFreedom PassAssured Income forthe Severely HandicappedGroupsOrganizationsNational Telecommuting InstituteSociety for Disability StudiesDisabled Peoples' International (DPI)VisitabilityWeThe15ParasportsSpecial OlympicsParalympic GamesDeaflympicsInvictus GamesCultureDisability in the artsDisability artDisability in the media\u00a0DisabilityListsvteThe Paralympic Games or Paralympics, also known as the Games of the Paralympiad, is a periodic series of international multisport events involving athletes with a range of disabilities. There are Winter and Summer Paralympic Games, which since the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul, South Korea, are held almost immediately following the respective Olympic Games. All Paralympic Games are governed by the International Paralympic Committee (IPC).The Paralympics began as a small gathering of British World War II veterans in 1948. The 1960 Games in Rome drew 400 athletes with disabilities from 23 countries, as proposed by doctor Antonio Maglio. As of the early 21st century, it is one of the largest international sporting events, with 4,520 athletes from 163 National Paralympic Committees at the 2020 Summer Paralympics.[1] Paralympians strive for equal treatment with non-disabled Olympic athletes, but there is a large funding gap between Olympic and Paralympic athletes.[2]The Paralympic Games are organized in parallel with and in a similar way to the Olympic Games. The IOC-recognized Special Olympics World Games include athletes with intellectual disabilities (although since 1992, people with intellectual disabilities also participate in the Paralympic Games), and the Deaflympics held since 1924 are exclusive for deaf athletes.[3][4]Given the wide variety of disabilities of Para athletes, there are several categories in which they compete. The allowable disabilities are divided into ten eligible impairment types: impaired muscle power, impaired passive range of movement, limb deficiency, leg length difference, short stature, hypertonia, ataxia, athetosis, vision impairment and intellectual impairment.[5] These categories are further divided into various subcategories.Forerunners[edit]Sir Ludwig GuttmannAthletes with disabilities at the Olympic Games[edit]Athletes with disabilities did compete at the Olympic Games prior to the advent of the Paralympics. The first athlete to do so was German-American gymnast George Eyser in 1904, who had one artificial leg. Oliv\u00e9r Halassy, a Hungarian amputee water polo player who competed in three successive Olympic Games, beginning in 1928.[6] Hungarian K\u00e1roly Tak\u00e1cs competed in shooting events in both the 1948 and 1952 Summer Olympics. He was a right-arm amputee and could shoot left-handed. Another athlete with a disability who appeared in the Olympics prior to the Paralympic Games was Lis Hartel, a Danish equestrian athlete who had contracted polio in 1943 and won a silver medal in the dressage event in the 1952 Summer Olympics.[7]Stoke Mandeville Games[edit]The first organized athletic event for athletes with disabilities that coincided with the Olympic Games took place on the day of the opening of the 1948 Summer Olympics in London. German-Jewish Ludwig Guttmann of Stoke Mandeville Hospital,[8] who had fled Nazi Germany with the help of the Council for Assisting Refugee Academics (CARA) in 1939,[9] hosted a sports competition for British World War II veteran patients with spinal cord injuries. The first games were called the 1948 International Wheelchair Games, and were intended to coincide with the 1948 Olympics.[10] Guttman's aim was to create an elite sports competition for people with disabilities that would be equivalent to the Olympic Games. The games were held at the same location each year, and in 1952 Dutch and Israeli veterans took part alongside the British, making it the first international competition of its own kind. In 1960, the 9th annual games took place outside of the UK for the first time in Rome, to coincide with the 1960 Summer Olympics which were also being held in Rome. These were to be later designated the 1st Paralympic Games.[11]These early competitions have been described as the precursors of the Paralympic Games, and Stoke Mandeville holds a similar place in the lore of the Paralympic movement as Greece holds in the Olympic Games; since 2012, the Paralympic flame has incorporated a \"heritage flame\" lit at Stoke Mandeville, although it was combined with flames lit in the host country for the formal start of the torch relay. Beginning in 2024, future Paralympic torch relays will officially begin in Stoke Mandeville, as an equivalent to the Olympic flame being created in Olympia.[12][13][14]Milestones[edit]Further information: Chronology of the Paralympic MovementThere have been several milestones in the Paralympic movement. The first official Paralympic Games, coincident with the ninth Stoke Mandeville Games but no longer open solely to war veterans, was held in Rome in 1960.[15] They were the brainchild of Antonio Maglio, a friend and follower of Guttmann and were financed almost entirely by Maglio's employer, the Workers National Accident Insurance Fund of Italy, then led by Renato Morelli, who was also Chairman of the International Social Security Association.[16] Four hundred athletes from 23 countries competed at the 1960 Games. Since 1960, the Paralympic Games have taken place in the same year as the Olympic Games.[17][18] The Games were initially open only to athletes in wheelchairs; at the 1976 Summer Games, athletes with different disabilities were included for the first time at a Summer Paralympics.[10] With the inclusion of more disability classifications the 1976 Summer Games expanded to 1,600 athletes from 40 countries.[17] The 1988 Summer Paralympics in Seoul was another milestone for the Paralympic movement. It was in Seoul that the Paralympic Summer Games were held directly after the 1988 Summer Olympics, in the same host city, and using the majority of the venues. This set a precedent that was followed in 1992, 1996 and 2000. It was eventually formalized in an agreement between the International Paralympic Committee (IPC) and the International Olympic Committee (IOC) in 2001,[17][19] and was extended through 2020.[20] On March 10, 2018, the two committees further extended their contract to 2032.[21] Despite being held in the same region, the 1992 Winter Paralympics used different competition venues than those used for the Olympic Games. 1994 Winter Paralympics were the first Winter Games to use the same venues and had the same Organizing Committee as the Winter Olympics.Winter Games[edit]Main article: Winter Paralympic GamesThe first Winter Paralympic Games were held in 1976 in \u00d6rnsk\u00f6ldsvik, Sweden. This was the first Paralympics in which multiple categories of athletes with disabilities could compete.[17] The Winter Games were celebrated every four years on the same year as their summer counterpart, just as the Olympics were. This tradition was upheld through the 1992 Games in Albertville, France; after that, beginning with the 1994 Games, the Winter Paralympics and the Winter Olympics have been held in those even-numbered years separate from the Summer Olympics.The winter games happen two years after the summer games.[17]International Paralympic Committee[edit]Main article: International Paralympic CommitteeIPC headquarters in BonnThe first Paralympic symbol (1988\u20131994) used five pa.The International Paralympic Committee is the global governing body of the Paralympic Movement. It comprises 178[22] National Paralympic Committees (NPC) and four disability-specific international sports federations.[23] The president of the IPC is Andrew Parsons. The IPC's international headquarters are in Bonn, Germany.[24] The IPC is responsible for organizing the Summer and Winter Paralympic Games. It also serves as the International Federation for nine sports (Paralympic athletics, Paralympic swimming, Paralympic archery, Paralympic powerlifting, Para-alpine skiing, Paralympic biathlon, Paralympic cross-country skiing, ice sledge hockey and Wheelchair DanceSport). This requires the IPC to supervise and coordinate the World Championships and other competitions for each of the nine sports it regulates.[25] IPC membership also includes National Paralympic Committees [22] and international sporting federations.[26] International Federations are independent sport federations recognized by the IPC as the sole representative of a Paralympic Sport. International Federations responsibilities include technical jurisdiction and guidance over the competition and training venues of their respective sports during the Paralympic Games. The IPC also recognizes media partners, certifies officials, judges, and is responsible for enforcing the bylaws of the Paralympic Charter.[27]Since its creation in 1989, IPC has a cooperative relationship with the International Olympic Committee (IOC). Delegates of the IPC are also members of the IOC and participate on IOC committees and commissions. The two governing bodies remain distinct, with separate Games, despite the close working relationship.[28]The Paralympic Games were designed to emphasize the participants' athletic achievements and not their disability. Recent games have emphasized that these games are about ability and not disability.[25] The movement has grown dramatically since its early days \u2013 for example, the number of athletes participating in the Summer Paralympic Games has increased from 400 athletes in Rome in 1960 to 4,342 athletes from 159 countries in Rio de Janeiro in 2016.[29] Both the Paralympic Summer and Winter Games are recognized on the world stage.Unlike the Olympic Games, English is the official language of the Paralympic movement. The other languages used at each Paralympic Games are the official languages of the host country or host region. Every proclamation (such as the announcement of each country during the parade of nations in the opening ceremony) is spoken in these two or more languages.Name and symbols[edit]Main article: Paralympic symbolsThe Paralympic flagAlthough the name was originally coined as a portmanteau combining paraplegic (due to its origins as games for people with spinal injuries) and Olympic,[30] the inclusion of other disability groups meant that this was no longer considered very accurate. The present formal explanation for the name is that it derives from the Greek preposition \u03c0\u03b1\u03c1\u03ac, par\u00e1 ('beside' or 'alongside') and thus refers to a competition held in parallel with the Olympic Games.[31] The Summer Games of 1988 held in Seoul was the first time the term Paralympic came into official use.\"Spirit in Motion\" is the current motto for the Paralympic movement. The current Paralympic flag is used since 2020 and contains three colours, red, blue, and green, which are the colours most widely represented in the flags of nations. The colours are each in the shape of an Agito (which is Latin for 'I move/I shake/I stir'), which is the name given to an asymmetrical crescent specially designed for the Paralympic movement. The three Agitos circle a central point, which is a symbol for the athletes congregating from all points of the globe.[32] The motto and symbol of the IPC were changed in 2003 to their current versions. The change was intended to convey the idea that Paralympians have a spirit of competition and that the IPC as an organization realizes its potential and is moving forward to achieve it. The vision of the IPC is, \"To enable Paralympic athletes to achieve sporting excellence and to inspire and excite the world.\"[33] The Paralympic anthem is \"Hymne de l'Avenir\" or \"Anthem of the Future\". It was composed by Thierry Darnis and adopted as the official anthem in March 1996.[34]Ceremonies[edit]Opening[edit]Opening ceremony of the 2004 Summer Paralympics in AthensAs mandated by the Paralympic Charter, various elements frame the opening ceremonies of the Paralympic Games. Most of these rituals were established are the same that 1920 Summer Olympics in Antwerp and were shared with the Olympic Games.[35] The Opening ceremony typically starts with the hoisting of the host country's flag and a performance of its national anthem. Immediately after the welcome act and the host country anthem and hosting their flag the \"Parade of Nations\" starts with the athletes into the stadium grouped by nation. Since the 1960 Summer Paralympics, the nations enter the stadium alphabetically according to the host country's or region official language, though with the host country's athletes being the last to enter. The host nation presents artistic displays of their culture and folklore.Protocolary segments are held with the speeches given, formally opening the games. After the opening declaration, the Paralympic flag enters the stadium and is hosted along with the Paralympic Anthem, aside from the host country flag, and the oaths by athletes, coaches, and judges are taken. Finally, the Paralympic flame is brought into the stadium and passed on until it reaches the final torch carrier\u2014often a Paralympic athlete from the host nation\u2014who lights the Paralympic flame in the stadium's cauldron.[36]Closing[edit]The closing ceremony of the Paralympic Games takes place after all sporting events have concluded. Flag-bearers from each participating country enter, followed by the athletes who enter together, without any national distinction.The Paralympic flag is taken down. Since the 1988 Winter Paralympics, with some exceptions, the national flag of the country hosting the next Summer or Winter Paralympic Games is hoisted while the corresponding national anthem is played. The games are officially closed, and the Paralympic flame is extinguished.[37] After these compulsory elements, the next host nation briefly introduces itself with artistic displays of dance and theater representative of its culture.Medal presentation[edit]A medal ceremony during the 2010 Winter ParalympicsA medals ceremony is held after the conclusion of each Paralympic event. The winner, second and third-place competitors or teams stand on top of a three-tiered rostrum when they are awarded their respective medal by an IPC member. The national flags of the medalists are then raised while the national anthem of the gold medalist is played.[38] Volunteering citizens of the host country also act as hosts during the medal ceremonies, as they aid the officials who present the medals and act as flag-bearers.[39] For every Paralympic event, the respective medal ceremony is held, at most, one day after the event's final.Equality[edit]Relationship with the Olympics[edit]In June 2001, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) and the International Paralympic Committee (IPC) signed an agreement that would ensure that the staging of the Paralympic Games is automatically included in the bid for the Olympic Games.[40] The agreement came into effect at the 2008 Paralympic Summer Games in Beijing, and the 2010 Paralympic Winter Games in Vancouver. However, the Salt Lake 2002 Organizing Committee (SLOC), chose to follow the practice of \"one bid, one city\" already at the 2002 Games in Salt Lake City, with one Organizing Committee for both Games, which was followed up by the 2004 Summer Games in Athens. The agreement was adjusted in 2003. An extension was signed in June 2006, after some troubles at 2006 Winter Paralympics.[40] Initially agreed to remain in effect until the 2012 Summer Olympics,[17] this has since been extended, currently[update] encompassing all Summer and Winter games up until the 2020 Summer Olympics.[41][42] Even beyond this, all Summer and Winter host cities currently announced are preparing pairs of Olympic and Paralympics Games. This was further confirmed when on 10 March 2018, the IOC and the IPC agreed to further extend the contract to the 2032 Summer Olympics.[21]The IOC has written its commitment to equal access to athletics for all people into its charter, which states,[43]The practice of sport is a human right. Every individual must have the possibility of practising sport, without discrimination of any kind and in the Olympic spirit, which requires mutual understanding with a spirit of friendship, solidarity and fair play....Any form of discrimination with regard to a country or a person on grounds of race, religion, politics, gender or otherwise is incompatible with belonging to the Olympic Movement.While the charter is silent on discrimination specifically related to disability; given the language in the charter regarding discrimination it is reasonable to infer that discrimination on the basis of disability would be against the ideals of the Olympic Charter and the IOC.[44] This is also consistent with the Paralympic Charter, which forbids discrimination on the basis of political, religious, economic, disability, gender, sexual orientation or racial reasons.[45]Chairman of the London organising committee, Sebastian Coe, said about the 2012 Summer Paralympics and 2012 Summer Olympics in London, England, that, \"We want to change public attitudes towards disability, celebrate the excellence of Paralympic sport and to enshrine from the very outset that the two Games are an integrated whole.\"[46]The 2014 Winter Paralympic Games is the first such Paralympics hosted by Russia. Russia ratified the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities during that period. Notably at 2010 Vancouver, their Paralympic team topped the medal table at the Winter Paralympics, while their Olympic team performed well below expectations at the Winter Olympics. This led the media to highlight the contrast between the achievements of the country's Olympic and Paralympic delegations, despite the greater attention and funding awarded to the Olympic athletes.[47] The Russian Federation organizers of the 2014 Winter Paralympic Games have, since 2007, made efforts to make the host city Sochi more accessible.[48]Paralympians at the Olympics[edit]See also: List of athletes who have competed in the Paralympics and OlympicsOscar Pistorius at a track meet on 8 July 2007Paralympic athletes have sought equal opportunities to compete at the Olympic Games. The precedent was set by Neroli Fairhall, a Paralympic archer from New Zealand, who competed at the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles.[49]In 2008, Oscar Pistorius, a South African sprinter, attempted to qualify for the 2008 Summer Olympics. Pistorius had both his legs amputated below the knee and races with two carbon fibre blades manufactured by \u00d6ssur. He holds Paralympic world record in the 400\u00a0meter event.[50] Pistorius missed qualifying for the 2008 Summer Olympics in the 400\u00a0meter race, by 0.70\u00a0seconds. He qualified for the 2008 Summer Paralympics where he won gold medals in the 100, 200, and 400\u00a0meter sprints.[51] In 2011, Pistorius qualified for the 2012 Summer Olympics and competed in two events: he made the semi-final in the 400 metres race; and his team came 8th in the final of the 4 \u00d7 400 metres relay race.[52] Even though all athletes are given equal opportunities to participate in these events, such as the 400 meter race, there has been growing criticism that the games may not be fair to all athletes. For example, athletes running a race with a left prosthetic leg may be disadvantaged compared to those with a right side prosthesis because the races are run in an anticlockwise direction, giving some athletes an advantage.[53]Some athletes without a disability also compete at the Paralympics; The sighted guides for athletes with a visual impairment are such a close and essential part of the competition that the athlete with visual impairment and the guide are considered a team, and both athletes are medal candidates.[54]Funding[edit]Starting at the 1992 Summer Paralympics, recent games have also been supported by contributions from major sponsors. Unlike the Olympics, where the IOC mandates that arenas be clean of sponsor logos, the Paralympics do allow the logos of official sponsors to be displayed inside arenas and on uniforms.[55]Media coverage[edit]While the Olympic Games have experienced tremendous growth in global media coverage since the 1984 Summer Paralympics, the Paralympics have been unable to maintain a consistent international media presence.Television broadcasts of Paralympic Games began in 1976, but this early coverage was confined to taped-delay releases to one nation or region. At the 1992 Summer Paralympics, there were 45\u00a0hours of live coverage but it was available only in Europe. Other countries broadcast highlight packages during the Games. No meaningful improvements in coverage occurred until the 2000 Summer Paralympics in Sydney.The 2000 Paralympics represented a significant increase in global media exposure for the Paralympic Games. A deal was reached between the Sydney Paralympic Organizing Committee (SPOC) and All Media Sports (AMS) to broadcast the Games internationally. Deals were reached with Asian, South American, and European broadcast companies to distribute coverage to as many markets as possible. The Games were also webcast for the first time. Because of these efforts, the Sydney Paralympics reached a global audience estimated at 300\u00a0million people.[56] Also significant was the fact that the organizers did not have to pay networks to televise the Games as had been done at the 1992 and 1996 Games.[57] Despite these advances, consistent media attention has been a challenge, which was evidenced in the coverage in Great Britain of the 2010 Winter Paralympics.The BBC was criticized for its minimal coverage of the 2010 Winter Paralympics as compared to its coverage of the 2010 Winter Olympics. The BBC announced it would stream some content on its website and show a one-hour highlight program after the Games ended. For the Winter Olympics the BBC aired 160 hours of coverage. The response from the BBC was that budget constraints and the \"time zone factor\" necessitated a limited broadcast schedule.[58] The reduction in coverage was done in spite of increased ratings for the 2008 Summer Paralympics, which was watched by 23% of the population of Great Britain.[58] In Norway, the Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation (NRK) broadcast 30 hours of the 2010 Winter Games live. NRK-sport were critical of parts of the TV production from Vancouver, and notified the EBU of issues such as the biathlon coverage excluding the shooting, and cross-country skiing with skiers in the distance, making it hard to follow the progress of the competition. NRK were far more pleased with the production of the ice sledge hockey and wheelchair curling events, which they felt reached the same level as the Olympic Games.[59]Private broadcaster Channel 4 acquired the rights to the Paralympics in the United Kingdom for the 2012 Summer Paralympics, and planned to air extensive coverage of the games; Channel 4 aired 150 hours of coverage, and also offered mobile apps, and three dedicated streaming channels of additional coverage on Sky, Freesat, Virgin Media and Channel 4's website.\"[60] Channel 4 also made a push to heighten the profile of the Paralympics in the country by producing a two minute trailer for its coverage, \"Meet the Superhumans\"; which aired simultaneously on over 70 commercial channels in the UK on 17 July 2012.[61][62] Channel 4 has since renewed its rights to the Games through 2024.[63] In January 2020, the Paralympics were classified as a Category A \"listed\" event by Ofcom as with the Olympics, mandating that they be broadcast in whole or in part by a free-to-air network.[64]Outside the Games[edit]A 2010 study by the University of British Columbia (UBC) on the Olympic Games Impact (OGI), showed that of roughly 1,600 Canadian respondents, 41 to 50 percent believed the 2010 Paralympic and Olympic Games in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada, triggered additional accessibility of buildings, sidewalks and public spaces. 23 percent of employers said the Games had increased their willingness to hire people with disabilities.[65]Chief Executive Officer for the International Paralympic Committee Xavier Gonzalez said about the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing, China, that:In China, the (Paralympic) Games were really a transformation tool for changing attitudes across the board in China towards people with disability, to building accessibility facilities in the city, to changing laws to allow people with a disability to be part of society.[66]Down syndrome participation[edit]Within the framework of the International Olympic Committee's commitment to equal access to athletics, concerns have been raised regarding inclusion of athletes with Down syndrome in the Paralympic Games. While the Paralympic movement strives for inclusivity, the absence of a specific classification for athletes with Down syndrome within Paralympic swimming events raises questions about equal and fair competition for Down syndrome athletes. International Paralympic Committee Para-swimming classification codes are based upon single impairment only, whereas Down syndrome individuals have both physical and intellectual impairments. Although swimmers with Down syndrome are able to compete in the S14 intellectual impairment category (provided they score low in IQ tests), they are often outmatched by the superior physicality of their opponents.[67][68] At present there is no designated Paralympic category for swimmers with Down syndrome, meaning they have to compete as intellectually disadvantaged athletes. This disregards their physical disabilities.[69][70]A number of advocacy groups globally have been lobbying for the inclusion of a distinct classification category for Down syndrome swimmers within the IPC Classification Codes framework.[71] Initiatives aimed at promoting greater inclusivity within the Paralympic movement have emerged, including advocacy and awareness-raising efforts targeting discrimination and ensuring equal opportunities for athletes with Down syndrome.[72] Despite ongoing advocacy, the issue remains unresolved, and swimmers with Down syndrome continue to face challenges in accessing appropriate classification pathways.[73]Classification[edit]Further information: Disability sport classificationOlena Iurkovska of Ukraine competing on cross-country sit-skis at the 2010 Winter ParalympicsThe International Paralympic Committee (IPC) has established ten disability categories. Athletes are divided within each category according to their level of impairment, in a functional classification system which differs from sport to sport.Categories[edit]The IPC has established ten disability categories, including physical, visual, and intellectual impairment. Athletes with one of these disabilities can compete in the Paralympics, though not every sport can allow for every disability category. These categories apply to both Summer and Winter Paralympics.[74]Physical Impairment \u2013 There are eight different types of physical impairment:Impaired muscle power \u2013 With impairments in this category, the force generated by muscles, such as the muscles of one limb, one side of the body or the lower half of the body is reduced, (e.g. spinal cord injury, spina bifida, post-polio syndrome).Impaired passive range of movement \u2013 The range of movement in one or more joints is reduced in a systematic way. Acute conditions such as arthritis are not included.Loss of limb or limb deficiency \u2013 A total or partial absence of bones or joints from partial or total loss due to illness, trauma, or congenital limb deficiency (e.g., dysmelia).Leg-length difference \u2013 Significant bone shortening occurs in one leg due to congenital deficiency or trauma.Short stature \u2013 Standing height is reduced due to shortened legs, arms and trunk, which are due to a musculoskeletal deficit of bone or cartilage structures. (e.g., achondroplasia, growth hormone deficiency, osteogenesis imperfecta)Hypertonia \u2013 Hypertonia is marked by an abnormal increase in muscle tension and reduced ability of a muscle to stretch. Hypertonia may result from injury, disease, or conditions which involve damage to the central nervous system (e.g., cerebral palsy).Ataxia \u2013 Ataxia is an impairment that consists of a lack of coordination of muscle movements (e.g., cerebral palsy, Friedreich's ataxia, multiple sclerosis).Athetosis \u2013 Athetosis is generally characterized by unbalanced, involuntary movements and a difficulty maintaining a symmetrical posture (e.g., cerebral palsy, choreoathetosis).Visual impairment \u2013 Athletes with visual impairment ranging from partial vision, sufficient to be judged legally blind, to total blindness. This includes impairment of one or more component of the visual system (eye structure, receptors, optic nerve pathway, and visual cortex).[74] The sighted guides for athletes with a visual impairment are such a close and essential part of the competition that the athlete with visual impairment and the guide are considered a team. Beginning in 2012, these guides along with sighted goalkeepers in 5-a-side football became eligible to receive medals of their own.[54][75]Intellectual Disability \u2013 Athletes with a significant intellectual impairment and associated limitations in adaptive behaviour. The IPC primarily serves athletes with physical disabilities, but the disability group Intellectual Disability has been added to some Paralympic Games. This includes only elite athletes with intellectual disabilities diagnosed before the age of 18.[74] However, the IOC-recognized Special Olympics World Games are open to all people with intellectual disabilities.[4]Classification system[edit]Main article: Disability sport classificationWithin the disability categories, athletes are further divided into Sport Classes according to the degree of activity limitation resulting from their impairments; this aims to minimise the impact of an athlete's impairment on their sporting performance against their rivals. Sport Classes are numbered, with a lower number signifying a greater level of impairment: for example, in Paralympic swimming athletes with visual impairments compete in three Sport Classes from S/SB11 to S/SB13, with S/SB11 athletes having a very low light acuity and/or no light perception, and S/SB13 athletes having the least severe visual impairment eligible for Paralympic sport.[76]Medical classification (until the 1980s)[edit]From its inception until the 1980s, the Paralympic system for classifying athletes consisted of a medical evaluation and diagnosis of impairment. An athlete's medical condition was the only factor used to determine what class they competed in. For example, an athlete who had a spinal cord injury that resulted in lower limb paresis, would not compete in the same wheelchair race as an athlete with a double above-knee amputation. The fact that their disability caused the same impairment did not factor into classification determination, the only consideration was their medical diagnosis. It was not until views on disabled athletics shifted from just a form of rehabilitation to an end in itself, that the classification system changed from medical diagnosis to a focus on the functional abilities of the athlete.[77]Functional classification (since the 1980s)[edit]The Swedish goalball team at the 2004 Summer ParalympicsWhile there is no clear date when the shift occurred, a functional classification system became the norm for disabled athletic classification in the 1980s. In a functional system, the focus is on what effect the athlete's impairment has on his or her athletic performance. Under this system, athletes with total loss of function in their legs will compete together in most sports, because their functional loss is the same and the reason for the loss is immaterial. The only exception to the functional system is the classification format used by International Blind Sports Federation (IBSA), which still uses a medically based system.[77]Some sports are only held for certain disability types. For example, goalball is only for visually impaired athletes. The Paralympics recognizes three different grades of visual impairment, consequently all competitors in goalball must wear a visor or \"black out mask\" so that athletes with less visual impairment will not have an advantage.[78] Other sports, like athletics, are open to athletes with a wide variety of impairments. In athletics, participants are broken down into a range of classes based on the disability they have and then they are placed in a classification within that range based on their level of impairment. For example: classes 11\u201313 are for visually impaired athletes, which class they are in depends on their level of visual impairment.[79] There are also team competitions such as wheelchair rugby. Members of the team are each given a point value based on their activity limitation. A lower score indicates a more severe activity limitation than a higher score. A team cannot have more than a certain maximum total of points on the field of play at the same time to ensure equal competition. For example, in wheelchair rugby, the four players' combined disability number must total no more than eight points.[80]Sports[edit]Main article: Paralympic sportsThere are twenty-two sports on the Summer Paralympic program and six sports on the Winter Paralympics program. Within some of the sports are several events. For example, alpine skiing has downhill, super combined, super-G, slalom, giant slalom. The IPC has governance over several of the sports but not all of them. Other international organizations, known as International Sports Federations (IF), notably the International Wheelchair and Amputee Sports Federation (IWAS), the International Blind Sports Federation (IBSA), and the Cerebral Palsy International Sports and Recreation Association (CP-ISRA), govern some sports that are specific to certain disability groups.[81] There are national chapters for these International Sport Federations including National Paralympic Committees, which are responsible for recruitment of athletes and governance of sports at the national level.[82]Cheating[edit]Main article: Cheating at the Paralympic GamesAfter the 2000 Sydney games, a Spanish basketball player alleged that several members of the gold medal-winning Spanish basketball team with intellectual disabilities (ID) did not have disabilities. He claimed that only two athletes out of the twelve-member team met the qualifications of an athlete with an intellectual disability.[83] A controversy ensued and the International Paralympic Committee (IPC) called on the Spanish National Paralympic Committee to launch an investigation.[84] The investigation uncovered several Spanish athletes who had flouted the ID rules. In an interview with the president of the federation that oversees ID competition, Fernando Mart\u00edn Vicente admitted that athletes around the world were breaking the ID eligibility rules. The IPC responded by starting an investigation of its own.[83] The results of the IPC's investigation confirmed the Spanish athlete's allegations and also determined that the incident was not isolated to the basketball ID event or to Spanish athletes.[83] As a result, all ID competitions were suspended indefinitely.[85] The ban was lifted after the 2008 Games after work had been done to tighten the criteria and controls governing admission of athletes with intellectual disabilities. Four sports, swimming, athletics, table tennis and rowing, were anticipated to hold competitions for ID athletes at the 2012 Summer Paralympics.[86][87]The Paralympics have also been tainted by steroid use. At the 2008 Games in Beijing, three powerlifters and a German basketball player were banned after having tested positive for banned substances.[86] This was a decrease in comparison to the ten powerlifters and one track athlete who were banned from the 2000 Games.[88] German skier Thomas Oelsner became the first Winter Paralympian to test positive for steroids. He had won two gold medals at the 2002 Winter Paralympics, but his medals were stripped after his positive drug test.[89] At the 2010 Winter Paralympics in Vancouver, Swedish curler Glenn Ikonen tested positive for a banned substance and was suspended for six months[90] by the IPC. He was removed from the rest of the curling competition but his team was allowed to continue. The 54-year-old curler said his doctor had prescribed a medication on the banned substances list.[91][92]Another concern now facing Paralympic officials is the technique of \"boosting\". Athletes can artificially increase their blood pressure, often by self-harming, which has been shown to improve performance by up to 15%. This is most effective in the endurance sports such as cross-country skiing. To increase blood pressure athletes will deliberately cause trauma to limbs below a spinal injury. This trauma can include breaking bones, strapping extremities in too tightly, and using high-pressure compression stockings. The injury is painless but it does affect the athlete's blood pressure.[93]Another potential concern is the use of gene therapy among Paralympic athletes. All Paralympic athletes are banned from enhancing their abilities through gene doping, but it is extremely difficult to differentiate these concepts.[94] The World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) is currently researching both gene doping and gene therapy, in part to discern the boundary between the two closely related concepts.[95]The IPC have been working with WADA since 2003, to ensure compliance with WADA's anti-doping code among its Paralympic athletes.[96] The IPC has also promised to continue increasing the number of athletes tested at each of its Games, in order to further minimize the possible effect of doping in Paralympic sports.[96] Mandatory in- and out-of competition testing has also been implemented by the IPC to further ensure all of its athletes are performing in compliance with WADA regulations.[96]Having sent samples for forensic analysis, the IPC found evidence that the prevalent doping by Russian athletes was in operation at the 2014 Winter Paralympics in Sochi.[97] On 7 August 2016, the IPC's Governing Board voted unanimously to ban the entire Russian team from the 2016 Summer Paralympics, citing the Russian Paralympic Committee's inability to enforce the IPC's Anti-Doping Code and the World Anti-Doping Code which is \"a fundamental constitutional requirement\".[97] IPC President Sir Philip Craven stated that the Russian government had \"catastrophically failed its Para athletes\".[98] IPC Athletes' Council Chairperson and CPC Member Todd Nicholson said that Russia had used athletes as \"pawns\" in order to \"show global prowess\".[99]Notable champions and achievements[edit]Further information: Lists of Paralympic medalists and List of multiple Paralympic gold medalistsTrischa Zorn of the United States is the most decorated paralympian in history. She competed in the blind swimming events and won a total of 55 medals, 41 of which are gold. Her Paralympic career spanned 24\u00a0years from 1980 to 2004. She was also an alternate on the 1980 American Olympic swim team, but did not go to the Olympics due to a boycott by the United States and several of its allies.[100][101] Ragnhild Myklebust of Norway holds the record for the most medals ever won at the Winter Paralympic Games. Competing in a variety of events between 1988 and 2002, she won a total of 22 medals, of which 17 were gold. After winning five gold medals at the 2002 Games she retired at the age of 58.[102] Neroli Fairhall, a paraplegic archer from New Zealand, was the first paraplegic competitor, and the third Paralympian, to participate in the Olympic Games, when she competed in the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles. She placed thirty-fourth in the Olympic archery competition, and won a Paralympic gold medal in the same event.[49]Host cities[edit]Main article: List of Paralympic Games host citiesYearSummer Paralympic Games[103]Winter Paralympic Games[104]EditionHost(s)Top nationEditionHost(s)Top nation19601 Rome\u00a0Italy[105]19642 Tokyo\u00a0United States[106]19683 Tel Aviv\u00a0United States[107]19724 Heidelberg\u00a0West Germany[108]19765 Toronto\u00a0United States[109]1 \u00d6rnsk\u00f6ldsvik\u00a0West Germany[110]19806 Arnhem\u00a0United States[111]2 Geilo\u00a0Norway[112]19847 New York City Stoke Mandeville\u00a0United States[113]3 Innsbruck\u00a0Austria[114]19888 Seoul\u00a0United States[115]4 Innsbruck\u00a0Norway[116]19929 Barcelona & Madrid[117]\u00a0United States[118]5 Tignes and Albertville\u00a0United States[119]19946 Lillehammer\u00a0Norway[120]199610 Atlanta\u00a0United States[121]19987 Nagano\u00a0Norway[122]200011 Sydney\u00a0Australia[123]20028 Salt Lake City\u00a0Germany[124]200412 Athens\u00a0China[125]20069 Turin\u00a0Russia[126]200813 Beijing\u00a0China[127]201010 Vancouver-Whistler\u00a0Germany[128]201214 London\u00a0China[129]201411 Sochi\u00a0Russia[130]201615 Rio de Janeiro\u00a0China[131]201812 PyeongChang\u00a0United States[132]202016 Tokyo[a]\u00a0China[133]202213 Beijing\u00a0China[134]202417 Paris202614 Milan-Cortina202818 Los Angeles203015TBA203219 Brisbane203416TBAa Postponed to 2021, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, marking the first time that the Paralympic Games has been postponed. They are still called the 2020 Summer Paralympics, even with the change in scheduling to one year later.[135] The Games were held from 24 August to 5 September 2021.[136]See also[edit]\u00a0Sports portalAll-time Paralympic Games medal tableParapan American GamesAsian Para GamesCommonwealth Paraplegic GamesCybathlonDisability flagInspiration porn (Ableism#Inspiration_porn)Notes[edit]^ Dehghansai, Nima; Lemez, Srdjan; Wattie, Nick; Baker, Joseph (January 2017). \"A Systematic Review of Influences on Development of Athletes With Disabilities\". Adapted Physical Activity Quarterly. 34 (1): 72\u201390. doi:10.1123/APAQ.2016-0030. PMID\u00a028218871.^ Vritika (2017-04-25). \"Difference between Olympics and Paralympics\". www.differencebetween.info. Archived from the original on 2021-09-08. Retrieved 2021-09-08.^ The World Games for the Deaf and the Paralympic Games Archived 2014-03-15 at the Wayback Machine, International Committee of Sports for the Deaf (CISS), December 1996^ a b Special Olympics and the Olympic Movement, Official website of the Special Olympics,1669^ \"Classification\". Official website of the Paralympic Movement. Archived from the original on 2014-03-16.^ \"Oliv\u00e9r Halassy Bio, Stats, and Results | Olympics at Sports-Reference.com\". 2016-12-03. Archived from the original on 2016-12-03. Retrieved 2023-02-25.^ DePauw and Gavron (2005), p. 38^ Correia, Susana (February 2008). \"Paralympics History\". Accessible Portugal Online Magazine. Archived from the original on February 6, 2009.^ \"SPSL Archive\". Rsl.ox.ac.uk. 1933-12-24. Archived from the original on 2012-08-28. Retrieved 2012-08-17.^ a b \"History of the Paralympic Movement\". Canadian Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on August 2, 2009. Retrieved 2010-04-07.^ \"Rome 1960\". International Paralympic Committee. Retrieved 2023-02-25.^ \"Stoke Mandeville revealed as permanent home of Paralympic flame\". BBC News. 2023-10-06. Retrieved 2024-03-24.^ \"Stoke Mandeville to stage first standalone Paralympic Flame Lighting Ceremony\". www.insidethegames.biz. 2023-10-06. Retrieved 2024-03-24.^ \"Paralympic Flame to be created at Stoke Mandeville for all future Paralympic Games\". International Paralympic Committee. Retrieved 2024-03-24.^ \"Paralympics traces roots to Second World War\". Canadian Broadcasting Centre. 2008-09-05. Archived from the original on 2014-03-19. Retrieved 2010-04-14.^ \"Cerimonia allo stadio dell'Acqua Acetosa: nasce una nuova dimensione dello sport\". www.coni.it. Retrieved 2023-01-15.^ a b c d e f \"History of the Paralympic Games\". Government of Canada. Archived from the original on 2010-03-12. Retrieved 2010-04-07.^ Galligan (2000), pp. 89\u201390^ DePauw and Gavron (2005) p. 92^ \"Paralympics 2012: London to host 'first truly global Games'\". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 2012-08-18. Retrieved 1 August 2012.^ a b \"IOC and IPC to partner until 2032\". Olympics. Archived from the original on 2018-03-11. Retrieved 10 March 2018.^ a b \"National Paralympic Committees\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2018-12-15. Retrieved 25 December 2018.^ \"International Organisations of Sports for the Disabled\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2017-07-11. Retrieved 25 December 2018.^ \"IPC Management team\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2018-11-30. Retrieved 25 December 2018.^ a b \"About the IPC\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2013-12-24. Retrieved 2010-04-06.^ \"International Sport Federations\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2018-11-30. Retrieved 25 December 2018.^ \"IPC Handbook\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2010-04-21. Retrieved 2010-04-29.^ Gilbert and Schantz (2008) p. 170^ \"Paralympic Games\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2013-09-28. Retrieved 2010-04-07.^ \"Definition of PARALYMPICS\". Archived from the original on 2021-08-28. Retrieved 2021-08-28.^ \"History of the Movement\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2014-01-03. Retrieved 2012-05-04.^ \"Paralympic Symbol & Motto\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2009-10-06. Retrieved 2010-04-07.^ Howe (2008), p. 59^ \"IPC Intellectual Property Rights\" (PDF). International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 19, 2010. Retrieved 2010-05-03.^ \"The Modern Olympic Games\" (PDF). International Olympic Committee. p.\u00a05. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2015-04-15.^ \"Paralympic opening ceremony to be 'family friendly'\". The Vancouver Sun. Canwest News Service. 2010-03-12. Archived from the original on 2010-03-17. Retrieved 2010-05-03.^ IPC Handbook June 2009 Bylaws Governance and Organizational and Organizational Structure Archived 2021-08-24 at the Wayback Machine (Google Quick View), International Paralympic Committee (IPC)^ Victory Ceremony podiums at 2010 Winter Games a testament to the mountains athletes have climbed en route to Olympic and Paralympic success, The Official website of the 2010 Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games Archived April 10, 2010, at the Wayback Machine^ \"Ceremony volunteers\". Vancouver Organizing Committee for the 2010 Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games. Archived from the original on 2010-05-27. Retrieved 2010-05-04.^ a b IPC-IOC Co-operation Archived 2009-09-08 at the Wayback Machine, The official website of the International Paralympic Committee^ \"IPC-IOC Cooperation\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2009-09-08. Retrieved 2010-05-03.^ \"IOC and IPC Extend Co-operation Agreement Until 2020\". paralympic.org. 9 May 2012. Archived from the original on 2018-03-10. Retrieved 9 March 2018.^ \"The Olympic Charter\" (PDF). International Olympic Committee. 2010. p.\u00a011. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2011-05-05. Retrieved 2010-04-29.^ Gilbert and Schantz (2008) p. 169^ \"Paralympic Vision and Mission\" (PDF). International Paralympic Committee. 2003. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2012-06-05. Retrieved 2010-04-29.^ Gibson, Owen (2010-05-04). \"Sainsbury's announces sponsorship of 2012 Paralympics\". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 2016-12-01. Retrieved 2016-12-12.^ \"Disabled Athletes Show Up Olympics Team\". Moscow Times. March 18, 2010. Archived from the original on 2014-03-11. Retrieved 2014-03-11.^ \"Sochi Paralympics confronts Russia's attitude towards disabled \u2013 World \u2013 CBC News\". CBC News. Archived from the original on 2014-03-11. Retrieved 2014-03-11.^ a b \"Neroli Fairhall, Champion Archer, Dies at 61\". The New York Times. 2006-06-13. Archived from the original on 2013-05-22. Retrieved 2010-04-07.^ \"World Para Athletics Records\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2018-11-29. Retrieved 25 December 2018.^ Longman, Jere (2007-05-15). \"An Amputee Sprinter: Is He Disabled to Too-Abled\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2009-04-10. Retrieved 2010-04-08.^ Paralympics 100m: Oscar Pistorius says past experience vital, BBC Sport, 21 May 2012, archived from the original on 2015-10-16, retrieved 2018-02-11^ \"Biomechanics: Right prosthetic legs have the edge\". Nature. 531 (7595): 417. 2016-03-24. Bibcode:2016Natur.531T.417.. doi:10.1038/531417d. ISSN\u00a00028-0836.^ a b Visually impaired skiers put fate in guide's hands Archived 2017-03-13 at the Wayback Machine, thestar.com, March 13, 2010^ Gibson, Owen. \"Paralympics reignite the Olympic buzz but with added twists\". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 2014-03-15. Retrieved 31 August 2012.^ Cashman and Darcy (2008), pp. 100\u2013101^ Goggin and Newell (2003), p. 91^ a b Sweney, Mark (2010-03-12). \"BBC criticised for scant coverage of Winter Paralympics\". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 2014-02-28. Retrieved 2010-04-30.^ Oppgitt over elendig Paralympics-produksjon Archived 2014-04-12 at the Wayback Machine (Norwegian), Harstad Tidende, March 25, 2010^ \"Unprecedented Rolling Coverage for London 2012 | IPC\". Paralympic.org. Archived from the original on 2012-05-30. Retrieved 2012-07-08.^ \"Ad of the Day: Paralympic Games Forget the Olympics. This is the summer's most stunning sports commercial\". Adweek. Archived from the original on 2012-08-10. Retrieved 11 August 2012.^ Usborne, Simon (2012-07-19). \"Paralympics: Channel 4's superhuman effort\". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 2012-08-22. Retrieved 11 August 2012.^ \"Channel 4 extends Paralympics commitment with Paris 2024 deal\". SportBusiness. 2020-08-28. Retrieved 2020-08-28.^ \"Ashes, Open and Champions League final 'not set for UK 'crown jewels' list'\". SportBusiness. 29 January 2020.^ Paralympics a force for change Archived 2010-05-11 at the Wayback Machine, University of British Columbia, March 4, 2010^ 2010 Paralympics about changing minds, not capturing hearts Archived 2014-03-08 at the Wayback Machine, CablePulse 24, March 12, 2010^ Liam Morgan (January 12, 2022). \"IPC urged to allow greater numbers of athletes with Down's syndrome to compete at Paralympics\". Insidethegames.biz. Retrieved March 2, 2024.^ Liam Llewellyn (November 21, 2022). \"Paralympics faces calls for Down's syndrome category to ensure level playing field\". Mirror. Retrieved February 10, 2024.^ Ariel Bogle (August 29, 2016). \"Athletes with Down syndrome fight for inclusion at the Paralympics\". Mashable.com. Retrieved March 2, 2024.^ Rebecca Williams (March 11, 2022). \"Paralympic dream for British Down syndrome swimmers at first national championships\". Sky Sports. Retrieved March 2, 2024.^ \"Special21 celebrates World Down Syndrome Day in Albufeira\". Portugal Resident. March 25, 2022. Retrieved March 2, 2024.^ Michael Bruxo (December 14, 2021). \"New push to make Down's syndrome swimmers eligible for Paralympics\". Portugal Resident. Retrieved March 2, 2024.^ Emily Laurence. \"Paralympics Participation swimmers with Down syndrome\". Down Syndrome International Swimming Organisation. Retrieved March 2, 2024.^ a b c \"Layman's Guide to Paralympic Classification\" (PDF). International Paralympic Committee. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2018-03-09. Retrieved 25 December 2018.^ \"Paralympics 2012: The able-bodied athletes at the Games\". BBC News. 31 August 2012. Archived from the original on 2012-08-31. Retrieved 31 August 2012.^ \"World Para Swimming Classifications and Categories - SB9, SB8\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2023-07-17. Retrieved 2023-07-17.^ a b \"The history of classification\" (PDF). International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2012-05-26. Retrieved 2010-04-30.^ \"Goalball\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2009-10-24. Retrieved 2010-04-08.^ \"Athletics\". Australian Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2010-01-18. Retrieved 2010-04-07.^ \"Wheelchair Rugby\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2010-06-19. Retrieved 2010-04-08.^ \"Organization\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2010-04-21. Retrieved 2010-04-14.^ \"Sport\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2010-03-05. Retrieved 2010-04-14.^ a b c Slot, Owen (2001-02-03). \"Cheating shame of Paralympics\". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 2011-12-22. Retrieved 2010-04-07.^ \"IPC Calls For Full Investigation\". International Paralympic Committee. 2000-11-27. Archived from the original on 2006-01-18. Retrieved 2010-04-07.^ \"IPC Suspends INAS-FID from Membership\". International Paralympic Committee. 2001-03-09. Archived from the original on 2004-12-24. Retrieved 2010-04-07.^ a b Grey-Thompson, Tanni (2008-09-11). \"Cheating does happen in the Paralympics\". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 2012-08-28. Retrieved 2010-04-07.^ Van de Vliet, Peter (2009-12-15). \"Re-Inclusion of Athletes with Intellectual Impairment in Paralympic Sports\" (PDF). International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 5, 2011. Retrieved 2010-04-07.^ \"Paralympians can do the same thing as Olympic athletes-including cheating\". Sports Illustrated. CNNSI.com. 2002-03-06. Archived from the original on 2008-08-28. Retrieved 2010-04-07.^ Maffly, Bryan (2002-03-13). \"Skier Fails Drug Test\". Salt Lake 2002 Paralympics. Archived from the original on 2010-06-05. Retrieved 2010-04-07.^ Anti-Doping Rule Violation of Swedish Wheelchair Curler Archived 2014-03-16 at the Wayback Machine, International Paralympic Committee (IPC), May 4, 2010^ Davies, Gareth (2010-03-21). \"Winter Paralympics 2010: Wheelchair curler's positive drug test mars closing ceremony\". The Telegraph. London: Telegraph Media Group Limited. Archived from the original on 2012-08-28. Retrieved 2010-05-03.^ Little, Lyndon (2010-03-19). \"Swedish wheelchair curler suspended for use of an illegal drug\". The Vancouver Sun. Canwest Publishing Inc. Archived from the original on 2010-04-24. Retrieved 2010-05-03.^ \"Feel-bad story of the day: Paralympians appear to be cheating\". The National Post. Agence France-Presse. 2010-03-17. Archived from the original on 2018-12-25. Retrieved 2018-12-25.^ Wolbring, G. (2008).  Oscar Pistorius and the future nature of Olympic, Paralympic and other sports.  SCRIPT-ed, 5(1). doi:10.2966/scrip.050108.139.^ \"Gene Doping\". World Anti Doping Agency. October 2009. Archived from the original on 2009-11-21. Retrieved 2013-09-27..^ a b c \"Levelling the Playing Field\" (PDF). Play True. No.\u00a03. World Anti-Doping Agency. 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-05-29. Retrieved 2012-04-13.^ a b \"The IPC suspends the Russian Paralympic Committee with immediate effect\". .paralympic.org. August 7, 2016. Archived from the original on 2017-12-07. Retrieved November 27, 2017.^ \"The IPC decision on the membership status of the Russian Paralympic Committee\". .paralympic.org. August 7, 2016. Archived from the original on 2017-08-28. Retrieved November 27, 2017.^ \"The IPC decision on the membership status of the Russian Paralympic Committee\". .paralympic.org. August 7, 2016. Archived from the original on 2017-08-28. Retrieved November 27, 2017.^ \"Trischa Zorn-Hudson\" (PDF). USA Swimming. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2010-06-19. Retrieved 2010-04-08.^ \"Trischa Zorn\". CNN. CNN.com. Archived from the original on 2012-10-23. Retrieved 2010-04-08.^ \"2002 Winter Paralympics\". Disabled Sports USA. Archived from the original on April 27, 2003. Retrieved 2010-04-19.^ \"Paralympic Games \u2013 Summer\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2014-03-15. Retrieved 2014-03-15.^ \"Paralympic Games \u2013 Winter\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2014-03-15. Retrieved 2014-03-15.^ \"Rome 1960 - Results\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2021-08-25. Retrieved 2021-09-05.^ \"Tokyo 1964 - Results\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2021-08-26. Retrieved 2021-09-05.^ \"Tel Aviv 1968 - Results\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2021-11-07. Retrieved 2021-09-05.^ \"Heidelberg 1972 - Results\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2021-08-25. Retrieved 2021-09-05.^ \"Toronto 1976 - Results\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2021-08-03. Retrieved 2021-09-05.^ \"Ornskoldsvik 1976 - Results\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2021-08-16. Retrieved 2021-09-05.^ \"Arnhem 1980 - Results\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2021-10-19. Retrieved 2021-09-05.^ \"Geilo 1980 - Results\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2021-01-19. Retrieved 2021-09-05.^ \"Stoke Mandeville & New York 1984 - Results\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2021-08-28. Retrieved 2021-09-05.^ \"Innsbruck 1984 - Results\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2021-05-08. Retrieved 2021-09-05.^ \"Seoul 1988 - Results\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2021-08-25. Retrieved 2021-09-05.^ \"Innsbruck 1988 - Results\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2021-09-05. Retrieved 2021-09-05.^ \"Madrid 1992 \u2013 the Paralympic Games that time forgot! | paralympicanorak\". Paralympicanorak.wordpress.com. 2012-06-25. Archived from the original on 2013-06-15. Retrieved 2012-10-13.^ \"Barcelona 1992 - Results\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2021-08-25. Retrieved 2021-09-05.^ \"Albertville 1992 Paralympic Winter Games - Results\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2021-05-02. Retrieved 2021-09-05.^ \"Lillehammer 1994 - Results\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2021-05-01. Retrieved 2021-09-05.^ \"Atlanta 1996 - Results\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2021-08-26. Retrieved 2021-09-05.^ \"Nagano 1998 - Results\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2021-05-14. Retrieved 2021-09-05.^ \"Sydney 2000 - Results\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2021-08-26. Retrieved 2021-09-05.^ \"Salt Lake City 2002 - Results\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2021-05-01. Retrieved 2021-09-05.^ \"Athens 2004 - Results\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2021-08-26. Retrieved 2021-09-05.^ \"Torino 2006 - Results\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2021-05-01. Retrieved 2021-09-05.^ \"Beijing 2008 - Results\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2021-08-26. Retrieved 2021-09-05.^ \"Vancouver 2010 - Results\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2021-11-03. Retrieved 2021-09-05.^ \"London 2012 - Results\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2020-02-12. Retrieved 2021-09-05.^ \"Sochi 2014 - Results\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2021-11-05. Retrieved 2021-09-05.^ \"Rio 2016 - Results\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2021-07-30. Retrieved 2021-09-05.^ \"PyeongChang 2018 - Results\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2021-07-23. Retrieved 2021-09-05.^ \"Tokyo 2020 - Results\". International Paralympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2021-08-26. Retrieved 2021-09-05.^ \"Beijing 2022 - Results\". International Paralympic Committee. Retrieved 2022-03-12.^ \"Joint Statement from the International Olympic Committee and the Tokyo 2020 Organising Committee - Olympic News\". International Olympic Committee. 2020-03-24. Retrieved 2020-03-24.^ \"Tokyo Olympics and Paralympics: New dates confirmed for 2021\". BBC Sport. 30 March 2020. Archived from the original on 24 April 2020. Retrieved 30 March 2020.References[edit]Cashman, Richard; Darcy, Simon (2008). Benchmark Games: The Sydney 2000 Paralympic Games. Petersham, Australia: Walla Walla Press. ISBN\u00a0978-1-876718-05-3. Retrieved 2010-04-29.DePauw, Karen P.; Gavron, Susan J. (2005). Disability Sport. Champaign, United States: Human Kinetics. ISBN\u00a0978-0-7360-4638-1. Retrieved 2010-04-29.Galligan, Frank (2000). Advanced PE for Edexcel. Oxford, United Kingdom: Heinemann Educational Publishers. ISBN\u00a0978-0-435-50643-8. Retrieved 2010-04-29.Gilbert, Keith; Schantz, Otto J. (2008). The Paralympic Games: Empowerment or Side Show?. New York, United States: Meyer and Meyer Ltd. ISBN\u00a0978-1-84126-265-9. Retrieved 2010-04-29.Goggin, Gerard; Newell, Christopher (2003). Digital disability: the social construction of disability in new media. Oxford, United Kingdom: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. ISBN\u00a0978-0-7425-1844-5. Retrieved 2010-05-03.Howe, P. David (2008). The cultural politics of the paralympic movement. New York, United States: Routledge. ISBN\u00a09780415288866. Retrieved 2010-04-29.Further reading[edit]Peterson, Cynthia and Robert D. Steadward. Paralympics\u00a0: Where Heroes Come, 1998, One Shot Holdings, ISBN\u00a00-9682092-0-3.Thomas and Smith, Disability, Sport and Society, Routledge, 2008, ISBN\u00a0978-0-415-37819-2.External links[edit]Wikimedia Commons has media related to Paralympic Games.Wikiquote has quotations related to Paralympic Games.Official websiteParalympic Sport TV, web-TV channel of the International Paralympic Committee (IPC)vte Paralympic GamesCharterHost citiesIPCNPCsMedal tablesMedalistsParticipating nationsSummerWinterSportsSymbolsSummer Games1960 Rome1964 Tokyo1968 Tel Aviv1972 Heidelberg1976 Toronto1980 Arnhem1984 New York / Stoke Mandeville1988 Seoul1992 Barcelona / Madrid1996 Atlanta2000 Sydney2004 Athens2008 Beijing2012 London2016 Rio de Janeiro2020 Tokyo\u20202024 Paris2028 Los Angeles2032 BrisbaneWinter Games1976 \u00d6rnsk\u00f6ldsvik1980 Geilo1984 Innsbruck1988 Innsbruck1992 Tignes / Albertville1994 Lillehammer1998 Nagano2002 Salt Lake City2006 Turin2010 Vancouver2014 Sochi2018 Pyeongchang2022 Beijing2026 Milan / Cortina d'Ampezzo2030 TBD\u2020Postponed to 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemicvteNations that have competed at the Paralympic GamesAfricaAlgeriaAngolaBeninBotswanaBurkina FasoBurundiCameroonCape VerdeCentral African RepublicComorosCongoDemocratic Republic of the CongoDjiboutiEgyptEthiopiaGabonThe GambiaGhanaGuineaGuinea-BissauIvory CoastKenyaLesothoLiberiaLibyaMadagascarMalawiMaliMauritaniaMauritiusMoroccoMozambiqueNamibiaNigerNigeriaRwandaS\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 and Pr\u00edncipeSenegalSeychellesSierra LeoneSomaliaSouth AfricaSudanTanzaniaTogoTunisiaUgandaZambiaZimbabweAmericasAntigua and BarbudaArgentinaArubaBahamasBarbadosBermudaBrazilCanadaChileColombiaCosta RicaCubaDominican RepublicEcuadorEl SalvadorGrenadaGuatemalaGuyanaHaitiHondurasJamaicaMexicoNicaraguaPanamaParaguayPeruPuerto RicoSaint Vincent and the GrenadinesSurinameTrinidad and TobagoUnited StatesUruguayVenezuelaVirgin IslandsAsiaAfghanistanBahrainBangladeshBhutanBruneiCambodiaChinaEast TimorHong KongIndiaIndonesiaIranIraqJapanJordanKazakhstanKuwaitKyrgyzstanLaosLebanonMacauMalaysiaMaldivesMongoliaMyanmarNepalNorth KoreaOmanPakistanPalestinePhilippinesQatarSaudi ArabiaSingaporeSouth KoreaSri LankaSyriaChinese TaipeiTajikistanThailandTurkmenistanUnited Arab EmiratesUzbekistanVietnamYemenEuropeAlbaniaAndorraArmeniaAustriaAzerbaijanBelarusBelgiumBosnia and HerzegovinaBulgariaCroatiaCyprusCzech RepublicDenmarkEstoniaFaroe IslandsFinlandFranceGeorgiaGermanyEastWestGreat BritainGreeceHungaryIcelandIrelandIsrael1ItalyKosovoLatviaLiechtensteinLithuaniaLuxembourgMaltaMoldovaMontenegroNetherlandsNorth MacedoniaNorwayPolandPortugalRomaniaRussiaSan MarinoSerbiaSlovakiaSloveniaSpainSwedenSwitzerlandTurkeyUkraineOceaniaAustraliaWinterFijiNew ZealandPapua New GuineaSamoaSolomon IslandsTongaVanuatuOtherIndependent Paralympic ParticipantsIndividual Paralympic AthletesNeutral Paralympic AthletesRefugee Paralympic TeamRPCUnified TeamHistoricalCzechoslovakiaEast GermanyRhodesiaSerbia and MontenegroSoviet UnionYugoslavia1 Israel has been a member of the European Paralympic Committee (EOC) since 1994.vteMulti-sport eventsGlobalOlympicsOlympic GamesSummerWinterYouth Olympic GamesParasportsParalympic GamesSummerWinterDeaflympicsSummerWinterD\u00e9fi sportifIBSA World GamesINAS Global GamesInvictus GamesWorld Dwarf GamesSpecial OlympicsSummerWinterWorld Abilitysport GamesProfessionsFIS Games2021 World Para Snow Sports ChampionshipsUCI Cycling World ChampionshipsInternational Army GamesLumberjack World ChampionshipWorld Air GamesMilitary World GamesWorld Police and Fire GamesWorld Firefighters GamesYouth and studentsFISU World University Games (Universiade)World School Sport Games (Gymnasiade)International Youth Green GamesInternational Children's GamesSELL Student GamesWorld Interuniversity GamesWorld School Sport GamesCommonwealth Youth GamesCPLP GamesUniversity International Sports FestivalOther typesArafura GamesCSIT World Sports GamesDew TourMind Sports OlympiadWorld Mind Sports GamesWorld Mind GamesWorld Beach GamesWorld Combat GamesWorld GamesWorld Masters GamesWorld Nomad GamesWorld Skate GamesWorld Urban GamesX GamesIntercommunityArab GamesBRICS GamesCommonwealth GamesCroatian World GamesGay GamesHighland gamesIslamic Solidarity GamesJeux de la FrancophonieLusofonia GamesMaccabiah GamesPan-Armenian GamesWorld Transplant GamesWorld Eskimo Indian OlympicsWorld Indigenous GamesWorld OutgamesWorld Polonia GamesRegionalAfricaAfrican GamesAfrican Para GamesAfrican Youth GamesAll-Africa University GamesWest African University GamesAmericasPan AmericanPan American GamesParapan American GamesJunior Pan American GamesAmericas Masters GamesCentral American and the CaribbeanCentral American and Caribbean GamesCentral American GamesLatin AmericanALBA GamesBolivarian GamesNorth AmericanCANUSA GamesNorth American Indigenous GamesNorth American OutgamesSouth AmericanSouth American GamesSouth American Beach GamesSouth American Para GamesSouth American University GamesSouth American Youth GamesCaribbeanCaribbean GamesAsiaPan AsianAsian GamesSummerWinterAsian Para GamesAsian Beach GamesAsian Indoor and Martial Arts GamesAsian Youth GamesSoutheast AsianSEA GamesASEAN School GamesASEAN University GamesASEAN Para GamesCentral Asian GamesEast Asian Youth GamesSouth Asian GamesWest Asian Games1EuropeBlack Sea Games1European GamesEuropean Masters GamesEuropean ChampionshipsEuropean Para ChampionshipsEuropean Para Youth GamesEuropean Youth Olympic FestivalEuroGamesEuropean Universities ChampionshipsEuropean Universities GamesGames of the Small States of EuropeInternational Erasmus GamesOceaniaAustralian Youth Olympic FestivalMicronesian GamesPacific GamesPacific Mini GamesArafura GamesPan Pacific Masters GamesIntercontinentalArab GamesArctic Winter GamesAsia Pacific Deaf GamesAsia Pacific Masters GamesIslesIndian Ocean Island GamesIsland GamesJeux des \u00eelesMediterranean GamesNationalAfricaSouth African Games1AmericasCanadaBritish ColumbiaOntarioQuebecSaskatchewanWesternColombiaUnited Statesamateur juniorsseniorsWarrior GamesNCSG,United States3AlabamaCaliforniaFloridaMassachusettsMissouriMontanaNebraskaNew YorkNorth CarolinaNorth Dakota1Lakota NationTexasWisconsinAsiaBangladeshChinaAll-China GamesNational GamesNational Peasants' GamesNational Youth GamesNational Ethnic GamesIndiaYouthUniversityIndonesiaJapanMalaysiaMongoliaPakistanPhilippinesNational GamesStudentYouthSingaporeSouth KoreaSummerWinterThailandYouthVietnamTaiwanNationalAmateurYouthUniversityEuropeNetherlands1Poland (youth)Spartakiad of Albania1Spartakiad of the Peoples of the USSR1youth1WheelPowerHistorical1Pre-Modern Olympics(in order, from 1900 BC to 1859 AD)Tailteann Games (ancient)Panhellenic GamesAncient Olympic GamesPythian GamesNemean GamesIsthmian GamesHeraean GamesPanathenaic GamesRoman GamesCotswold Olimpick GamesGog Magog GamesWenlock Olympian Society Annual GamesZappas OlympicsAlternatives to theModern OlympicsAryan GamesFriendship GamesGANEFOGoodwill GamesInter-Allied GamesIslamic GamesLiberty Bell ClassicPeople's OlympiadWorkers' OlympiadsSpartakiadDefunct regional orcommunity eventsAfro-Asian GamesAsian Indoor GamesAsian Martial Arts GamesBaltic Sea GamesBlack Sea GamesCentral African GamesEast Asian GamesFar Eastern Championship GamesFESPIC GamesGames of the New Emerging ForcesPacific Ocean GamesSpartakiad of the Peoples of the USSRTailteann Games (modern)West African GamesWomen's Islamic GamesWorld Youth GamesIWAS World GamesCerebral Palsy GamesWinter gamesInternationalOlympicsParalympicsWinter University GamesFIS GamesNordic Games1Commonwealth1World ScoutArctic Winter GamesKennedy Memorial1New Zealand Winter GamesWinter World Masters GamesRegionalNational Winter Games of ChinaAsian Winter GamesEuropean Youth Olympic FestivalWinter X Games EuropeRussian\u2013Chinese Winter Youth Games1 Defunct2 Sub-national3 51 component games in 36 U.S. states Category List WikiProjectvteOlympic GamesOlympic sportsOlympismIOCCharterOlympic CongressIOC meetingsInternational sports federationsMedalsMedal tableAll-time medal tableyouthMedal table leaders by Olympic GamesMedalistsyouthMedal tiesIncentives by countryStripped medalsOlympic diplomaOlive wreathNationsSummer OlympicsWinter Olympicstropical nationscountry codesHost citiesBidsyouthVenuesyouthOlympic StadiumCeremoniesPeople who opened the OlympicsTorch relayslighters of the Olympic cauldronKeepers of the Olympic flagMediaTelevisionOlympic Broadcasting ServicesOlympic ChannelSocial mediaVideo gamesSymbolsFlameOlympiadOathSongs and anthemsHymnEmblemPosterMascotsCoinssummerwinterPierre de Coubertin medalOlympic CupOlympic Diploma of MeritOlympic LaurelOlympic OrderOtherArt competitions at the OlympicsmedalistsScandals and controversiesantisemitismcolonialismdopingDeathsWWIWWIIParticipation of womenRelatedParalympic GamesContinentalAfricanAsianEuropeanPacificPan-AmericanOlympic Esports SeriesDeaflympicsSpecial Olympics1906\u00a0Intercalated\u00a0GamesAncient Olympic GamesOlympic GamesSummer1896 Athens1900 Paris1904 St. Louis1908 London1912 Stockholm1916[a]1920 Antwerp1924 Paris1928 Amsterdam1932 Los Angeles1936 Berlin1940[b]1944[b]1948 London1952 Helsinki1956 Melbourne1960 Rome1964 Tokyo1968 Mexico City1972 Munich1976 Montreal1980 Moscow1984 Los Angeles1988 Seoul1992 Barcelona1996 Atlanta2000 Sydney2004 Athens2008 Beijing2012 London2016 Rio de Janeiro2020 Tokyo[c]2024 Paris2028 Los Angeles2032 Brisbane2036Winter1924 Chamonix1928 St. Moritz1932 Lake Placid1936 Garmisch-Partenkirchen1940[b]1944[b]1948 St. Moritz1952 Oslo1956 Cortina d'Ampezzo1960 Squaw Valley1964 Innsbruck1968 Grenoble1972 Sapporo1976 Innsbruck1980 Lake Placid1984 Sarajevo1988 Calgary1992 Albertville1994 Lillehammer1998 Nagano2002 Salt Lake City2006 Turin2010 Vancouver2014 Sochi2018 Pyeongchang2022 Beijing2026 Milan Cortina2030Youth Olympic GamesSummer2010 Singapore2014 Nanjing2018 Buenos Aires2026 Dakar[d]2030Winter2012 Innsbruck2016 Lillehammer2020 Lausanne2024 Gangwon2028^ Cancelled due to World War I^ a b c d Cancelled due to World War II^ Postponed to 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic^ Postponed to 2026 due to the COVID-19 pandemic\u00a0Portal Category CommonsvteDisabilityMain topicsDisabilityDisability studiesMedical modelSocial modelApproachesIEPInclusionLearning disabilityMainstreamingPhysical therapydriver rehabilitationSpecial needsschooleducationRights, law, supportRightsAbleism/disablismDisability rightsPejorative termsLawAODAADAConvention on the Rights of Persons with DisabilitiesDeclaration on the Rights of Disabled PersonsInternational Classification of Functioning, Disability and HealthServicesServices for mental disordersServices for disabled peopleSupportDLAODSPRailSSDISSIStudentsCNIBActivist groupsCCDDPIMINDSReach CanadaStructural and assistiveAccessible toiletActivities of daily livingAssistive technologyIndependent livingMobility aidOrthotics and bracesPersonal Care AssistantPhysical accessibilityProstheticsUniversal designWeb accessibilitySocial issuesAugmentative and alternative communicationEmotional or behavioral disabilityInvisible disabilityDisability and LGBT identitiesDisability and religionDisability and povertyDisproportionality in Special EducationSexuality and disabilityYouth and disabilityArts, media, culture, sportDisability cultureDisability artDisability in the artsDisability in children's literatureDisability in horror filmsDisability in the mediaParasportsDeaflympicsParalympicsSpecial Olympics Category ListsPortal:\u00a0SportsAuthority control databases InternationalVIAFNationalSpainFranceBnF dataGermanyIsraelUnited StatesSwedenLatviaJapanRetrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Paralympic_Games&oldid=1221848907\""},